FOOD SCIENCE

-)

VEL {erg
FOR THE REGISTERED DIETITIAN NUTRITIONIST EXAMINATION

a VERITENSE™ product

WRITTEN BY

Bailey DeBarmore, PhD MHS RDN LDN
Creator of the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™

Version: May 1, 2023

© 2022 Veritense™

Table of Contents

TOPS Of USC .......eecceceeeeeeeeeeeeneeeseaeeseeeseeeeeseaeeeaeeeeesaeseeeseueeseaeeeceeeseaeeeeaeeseeeeeeaeaseeeseaeeeeeaeseneeseeaeeeeeaeeeeaeees 3
StuCYING Tip 20.2... cece cceeeeeseeeceeeeeteeeeeeeeseneeeeeaeeeceeeseceeeseaaessneeeeeaeeseeseeeneaeeseaeeseeaeasneeeseeeeeseaeseneeseeaaeeeeeeeeeaeees 3
Physical and Chemical Properties Of FOOd .............cccccccccseeccessececsesseeeecesseeeeceseeeeecceeaeeceeeeaeeseeseaeeeeeeeeeeesenaeaes 4
Colloid SYStOMS .0...... cece ccc ccseeecceeaeeceeseeeceeseeeeeesaeseeceeseseeceeaeececeeaeececeeaeeeeccesueeseeeeaeesecceaeeeeceeueeesenauaes 4
Water ooo ee cece ceneceneeeeseeeaeeeaeeeaeeeneeesaeeaeeeaeceaeseeesesaseaeeeaeeeaeseseseseseeeseaeseaeeeaeeceseeseeeseseseaeseaeseneeeneeeeeeees 6
Fruits and Vegetables ..........cccccccccccecesceecseeeeseeeeceeseceeeeeaeecceeeeesaeeseeseseeeeseaeeseeeseaeeeeaeseeeeeeaeeeeeesenaeees 8
SUGAIS ooo .eeeeecccccceseeceeceeeaeecneeecceeeseaeeecceeeeeaeeseeaeeecaeesesaeseesaeacaeeseseeeseeeseaeesecaeaeceeeseueesesaeseneesecaeeseeaeeeeaeees 13
Cereals And FIOUT 0.2... eeeecceeceeeceeeeeeeceseeeeneeeneceseeeseeeseeeeneseeeeseeeceeeeeeenaeenaeeaeeeeseseaeceaeeseaeeeaeeaeeeeeseneeenees 15
Milk and Dairy Products ............:ccccccccseccceeeeseeeeeeeeeceeeceeaeeceeaeeceaeeseaeeceeeeeeaeeseeasescaeeseaeeseneeeeeaeeseeaeeeeaeeeees 19
EQQS....eeeeccceeseeesececeseeeseeeeeeseeceeaeeeceeseaesesaeeeeeeeesaeseeesecseeeeaecceeeeseseeseeeseseeaseeaeaeseeeseeeeseeeaesceeeseeseeeeeeesenaes 21
Meat, Poultry and Meat Alternatives.............ccccccecccceeceeeseeeeeeeseeecseaeeeeseeaeeeseneeaeeeeceeeeseeeneaeesseneaeeesenaeess 22
FISH ooo. .eeeeecceeceeeesceeseeceeeaeesecseecaeesecaecsaeeeeaeesecaeesecsaeeaeseaseaeesesaeeaeceaeeaeeaeacaeeaeeseeeaesseseaeseeseeseaeeaeeeaeeaeeeeees 24
Fats And OilS........ceeceececeeceeseeeseeeseeeeeeeseeeseeeeeesueeeaeeeaeeseeseeeseecsaeeseeesaeeeeeeeesaeeeeeeeaeseaeeeseeseeeseeeseeeeeeeaes 25
Leavening Agent ..........cceescccecseeeseeeeenseeeseeeeeaeeeeeeeeesaeeeeeaeeseeaeecsaeesesaeeeeeeeeeaeeesaeeeeaeeseaeeseneeeeeeeseeeeeeneesee 28
Batters And DOUGNS ...........ccccceccceceeeeeeeseeeseeeeaeeeeeeeeesaeeeecaeeseeaeecneeeeeseeeceeaeeeaeeeeeaeeeseeseaeeseneaeseaeeseeaeeeeeeeeen 28
BOVElAG€S .....ceeeceseseeeeeeeeeeseeeneeeeenaeeseeaeecseeeeeaeesseaeeecaeeeeeaeeeeeaeeeaaeeseaeeeceeeeeseaeneaeeeeaeeseaeeseneeeeeeseeeeeeueesen 29
Inspections and Grading Standards ..0..........ccceccceseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeneeeeeneeeeeeaeeeeeeeaeesseeeseaesesaeseneeseeeeeeeneeeenaes 30
Food Preservation and Packaging..........::cccccccscseecseseeeeeeeeseseeeseeeeneeeseaeeeneeeeeaeeeneeeeeeeeseeeseneaeeeeeseeeeseeeeeee 33
DIVING. one. eeeecceecceeeeseeeceneeeeeaeeenaeeenaeeseeaeecneaeecaeeseeaeeecaeeceeaeeeeeaeeesueeseseeeceeeeeeaeeeneaeeecaeeseseeseneeeseeeseeeeeeaeeseea 33
CAMNING........ cc cceccceeceeeeeeeeeeesseeeseeseceseaeseesseeseeacceecseesseaseeaseeaseeeeceeeseseseeeseeaeeeaeeeseseseseeeseeaseeaseeaeecaeseaseenees 33
Fermentation ...........cccccccececseecseeeseeeseeeseeeeseecseeeseeeeaeeeseeceeseeseeceaeeseeeeaesseeseeaseeessaeeseseaeeeseeseeeseneeeaeesaeeees 34
Refrigeration .........ccccccccccccecseseecseeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeceeseeceeeceeaeeceeaesecaeesesaeeseaseseaeeseaeeceaeeseaeeeeaeseeeseeseeeeeeesenaes 34
FLO@ZING ......cccccceeceseeesseeeceseeeeeeeecsseeeeuescesaeeeaeeceeseeseseecesueecesaeeeeeesesaeeeaeeeeaeeseaeaseaeeeeueseeaeaeeeeeeaeeeeeaeeenaes 34
Pa@Ste@uriZatiOn ..........ccccecceeeseecseeeeeeeseeeseeeeseeeeeeeseeeeaeeeseeseeseeseeceaeseaeesaeeseeeeeeseeeesseeeaeeeaeaeeeeseeeeeeeseaeeeeeaes 34
WrrACiatiOn ........cceeceeeceseeeeeeeeseeeseeeseeseeeeeecseeseeeceeeaeeeaeeseeseeseeesueeseeeaeeseeeeseaseeesseeeaeeeaeeeseeseneseeeseaeeeeesees 34
Pulsed Light ............::ccceeeeceeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesueeeaeeeseeeeeseeeseeseaeseaeesaeeseeseeseeseeeeeaeseaeeeseeseneseeeseeeeeeaes 35
High Pressure Processing (Pascalization) ..............cccccssceeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeseeeaeeeaeeeaeeeeeeeeeeseeseaeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeaeees 35
ONMIC HEARING «0.0... eee cece cee eeeeceeeeeneeeeeeseeeeecsneceseeeseeesceeseeceaeeseeseaeeaeeeneeenacenaeeeseseseeeaeeeaeeaeeeeeeeeseaeeenees 35
Pulsed Electrical Field ..........cc ce ceccceseecceeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeseseeeseaeeeceeesesaeeeeeaeseeeseaeesseeeseneeseeeaeeeseeseeeeeeeneeeenaes 35
OZONE 00. eeeeeeeeeceeeeseeeseeeeseeeseeeneeceseeeseeeaeceeecsuecsueceseeeeeeeeeeneseaeeeeaceaeceseeesacenacenaeeeseseneeeaeessaceaaeeaeeeaeeeaeeeaees 35
UltraSOniCation 0... cece cece eeeeceeeeeeeeeaeeeseeeeeaeeeeeeeeesaeeeecaeeseeaeecsaeeeeseeeceeeeeeaeeeeeaeeeseeseseeseseeeeeueeseeeeeeeeesen 35
PAN=T~) 0) (C0 d= (62,¢- (0180 eee 36
Modified Atmosphere Packaging ...........:ccccceseecseseceseeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaeeeseeeeeeaeeeneaeeeeaeeseneeseneaseeeeseeeeeeeesens 36
FOO Additives 00.0... cece cceeceeseeeseeeeeneeeesaeeeeeeecseeeeeeseueeseaesenueeseaeseeeaeeeaeeeeeaeasseeeseceesesaeseneeseeaeeeeneeeesaes 36

Food Science 2
© 2022 Veritense™

FOOd Preparation ..........cccccceccseecseseeeseeeeeeaeeeneeeeeaeeceeeeeeeaeeeseaeeeseaeeeceeeseseeeceeeeeeseesneaeeenaeeeeseeseneaeeeeeseeeeeeneesee 41
Dry Heat... eee eee cece ccceeeeeseeeneeeeeneeeeeeaeecneeeeeaeeeeeeeeecaeesecaeeeeeaeecsaeeseaeeeneeeeeeaeeeneaeeenaeeseaeeseneaseeaeeeeeeeseaeeseea 41
MOisSt Heat... eee eccce cc ceeeeeseeeseeeeeneeeseeaeecneeeeeaeeceeeeeecaeesecaeeeeeaeeesaeeseaeeeeaeseeeaeeeseaeseeeeeeeseeseneaeeeeeseeeeeeeeseea 42

Biotechnology and Genetic Engine@ering................cccccccceeeccesseeeneeeeeseeeeeeeeseeeeseaeecneeeeeaeeseeaeaeeeseeaeeeseaeeenaeees 43

Study Guide Questions ..........ccc cece cee ccceeeeeeeeecceeeesaeeseaaeeeeeeeeeaaeeseaeesceeseeeaeeeseaeeceaeeseseeseeeseeeaeeseeseeeeeeeseaaes 43

Practice QUESTIONS 2.0.0... cece eeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeueeeaeeeseeeseeseeseeeeaeeeaeesaeseseeseeseeseaeseaeeeaeaseeeeeeeseneeeeeeeeeaes 44

Practice Questions (ANSWETS)..........ccccccseccceseeeseeceeeeeseeeeeeseeceeaeeesaeeceaeeeceeeecaeeeeeeeeceaeeeeseeseeeeeesaeeseeaeeseaeeeees 46

REPEFENCES uo. eeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeneeeseeeeaeseseeeeeeseeeseessueseaeeeaeeeseeseeseesueesaeeeaeeseeseeseeseaeeeeeeaeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeaeeeeeaes 48

Terms of use

Bailey DeBarmore is the creator and sole owner of the exclusive copyright to this study resource.

This publication may not be shared physically or electronically with anyone, manipulated, copied,
reprinted and sold, altered, or reproduced in any form or by any means without requesting further
permission from the owner, Bailey DeBarmore.

This book is for personal use only by a single individual. It should not be distributed to a dietetic internship
class or otherwise used for academic purposes without discussing terms of use with the owner. By
purchasing this item, you agree to the Terms of Use outlined herein.

To inquire about further permissions for this document, including access for groups such as dietetic
internship classes or graduate courses, contact the owner to learn about your options.

Studying Tips

When studying the food science information for the RD exam it is easy to feel overwhelmed by
the large amount of information that needs to be ‘memorized’. As you read through the material,
think about what keyword and definition questions can be asked of you. For example:

e What is [food additive] used for in food processing?

e Which process uses [description/definition]?
For different types of foods, and their physical and chemical properties, think about what is
unique of each food category. Think about the implication of the macronutrients that

predominate in that food and the implications for nutritional content and exposure to heat and
acid.

Food Science 3
© 2022 Veritense™

Physical and Chemical Properties of Food

Reference (unless otherwise specified): Brown AC. Understanding Food: Principles and Preparation. 5th ed. Boston,
MA: Cengage; 2014.'

Colloid Systems

A solution is when a solute dissolves in a solvent, for example, salt dissolving in water to form
salt water. A suspension is when the particles are too large to “go into solution” and are instead
suspended in the solvent, for example, adding flour to water, and the flour particles being
suspended in the water rather than dissolved.

A colloid system is a mixture with one part dispersed in another, with the type of colloid system
dependent on the form of the two parts (gas, liquid, solid). While a colloid system may appear
like a solution to the eye (such as mayonnaise), at the microscopic level, the particles are large
or clustered together, rather than truly dissolved. Colloid systems can separate over time
through force or changes in temperature, such as freezing and heating.

Son

solution suspension colloid

Figure 1. Comparison of a solution, suspension, and colloid.

One way to tell the difference between a true solution and a suspension or a colloid is the
Tyndall Test. This test involves shining a light through the suspected solution. The light beam
won't be visible through a true solution, but will be visible through a suspension like flour and
water, or a colloid like milk or mayonnaise because the particles scatter the light. Head to your
kitchen and try the Tyndall Test!

Food Science 4
© 2022 Veritense™

A foam has air (gas) dispersed
in liquid. Examples in food
include whipped cream and egg
white after whisking. Emulsions
are solutions where a liquid is
dispersed in another liquid with
which it is typically incapable of
being mixed. A classic example
is mayonnaise, with oil and
vinegar emulsified via lecithin,
found in egg yolk. Emulsifiers
have both hydrophilic and
hydrophobic parts of the same
molecule, such as
phospholipids. Mayonnaise and
milk are stable emulsions that
won't separate unless heated.

Salad dressings with oil and emulsifier
vinegar are unstable emulsions
that will separate. See Figure 2. Figure 2. Panel A: unstable emulsion of water and oil. Panel B: stable emulsion

A sol is a solid is dispersed in a of water and oil due to addition of an emulsifier. Panel C: Close view of water
liquid, such as scattering gelatin droplets emulsified in oil (left) and oil droplets emulsified in water (right). Image

‘ created at www.biorender.com.
across a liquid when making
jelly, forming a sol, before reducing the temperature and a gel is formed. A gel can ‘weep’ back
into a partial sol state, when it undergoes syneresis, or the loss of liquid from a solid.

Solid foams are air dispersed in a solid, such as carbon dioxide forming the structure of bread
or cake. To go from whisked egg white to meringue, the egg white is heated, protein coagulates,
and liquid dissipates creating a solid foam. A gel is a liquid dispersed in a solid, and is typically
formed after cooling a sol. Solid emulsion, like butter and margarine, are also termed water-in-
oil emulsions, as the water droplets are scattered in an oil or lipid phase, in contrast to milk or
mayonnaise which has oil droplets dispersed in a liquid phase.

Table 1. Colloidal systems by dispersed phase and dispersing medium

Dispersed Phase

| mone Liquid aerosol Solid aerosol
fog, mist smoke

Foam eT es Sol, suspension
Liquid (whipped cream, mayonnaise, salad ( on )
Dispersing Medium whisked egg white dressing rev

(continuous phase) Gel (gelatin, jelly,
Solid foam jam, custard)
(meringue, bread, Solid sol (glass)
cake, ice cream) Solid emulsion

Source: Some New Aspects of Colloidal Systems in Foods. Milani JM and Golkar A. DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.85298

Food Science 5
© 2022 Veritense™

Water

Water is the simplest of all nutrients but makes up 60 — 70% of the body. Water is made up of 2
hydrogen atoms and 1 oxygen atom resulting in a polar molecule with positive and negative
charges. These charges are instrumental in many functions of food science, such as the need
for an emulsifier to make a stable emulsion.

slight
positive
charge

water
(liquid)

Figure 3. Polarity of water molecules (top left); water in solid state (ice, bottom left), water in liquid state
(bottom right), water in gaseous state (steam, top right).

At 0°C (32°F) water can freeze and form ice, its solid state. Water expands when it freezes. The
hydrogen bonds (between H and O) are stronger in ice than in water. The heat of fusion refers
to the energy released when water freezes into ice. We can add sugar or salt to lower the
freezing point of water. These methods are used in food production, like to lower the freezing
point of ice cream so that it is not frozen solid at freezer temperatures. About 4 cups of sugar
per 1 L water is added to ice cream to decrease the freezing point to about — 4°C (24°F).

Food Science 6
© 2022 Veritense™

Sprinkling salt on sidewalks can help prevent sheets of ice from forming, as long as the
temperature stays above — 21°C (- 6°F).

When we heat water, we break the hydrogen bonds holding the water molecules together. From
solid to liquid, the bonds are fewer and weaker. From liquid to gas, such as the steam rising of a
pot of boiling water, the molecules move so rapidly that they are not bonded to any other water
molecules. Liquid water turns to steam at 110°C (212°F) at sea level and the heat released as
the hydrogen bonds are broken is called the heat of vaporization. As altitude increases above
sea level, lower oxygen levels and less atmospheric pressure affect cooking times and
temperature. Moisture quickly evaporates. Liquids will boil at lower temperatures and to
compensate, cooking times must increase for food safety and for foods to be ‘done’. Read the
“High Altitude Cooking and Food Safety” pamphlet from the USDA FSIS available at:

https://www.fsis.usda.gov/shared/PDF/High_Altitude_ Cooking and Food Safety.pdf.

Adding sugar or salt can increase the boiling point. For example, many people sprinkle salt over
a pot of water they will boil for pasta so that the water will be at a higher temperature when you
add the pasta.

Water activity

Water activity (aw) is the vapor pressure of water in food divided by the vapor pressure of pure
water and is related to perishability of a food. Just as water makes up much of our body, it is
also a large component of many foods. Microbes that can spoil food and cause illness if
consumed require a certain amount of water to survive. Therefore, reducing the water activity of
a food is often used to prevent microbial growth and spoiling. Bacteria require aw of 0.85 and
1.0. No microorganism can survive at aw below 0.50. Note that water activity is not exactly the
same as ‘water content’ because water can be ‘bound’, or held tightly by other molecules such
as proteins and cell membranes.

Functions of water

Water is the universal solvent and plays an important role in food production and processing.
Water can dissolve compounds and water can help disperse compounds in foods. Some
examples include using water to make beverages like juice or coffee, which are solutions, or to
make colloidal dispersions, such as homogenized milk. Adding acid or alkaline compounds to
cooking water before cooking vegetables creates an acidic or alkaline environment that affects
the color and firmness of the vegetables. Salts can ionize into separate electrolytes in water,
and electrolytes can form salts in water. To create table salt, sodium and chloride are added to
water and then the water is evaporated. Hydrolysis occurs when water reacts with a compound
to form another compound, such as breaking down sugars, proteins, and amino acids. Water is
essential for crucial many food science reactions, such as the action behind leavening agents in
breads or activating gluten formation. Finally, osmosis, or the process where water is drawn to
the highest concentration of a solute, is used for dehydrating foods.

Food Science 7
© 2022 Veritense™

Table 2. Water functions in food processing and production

jui
Supersaturated solutions

Colloidal dispersions
lonization
Acidity/alkalinity

Salt formation

Homogenized milk

Salt and other electrolytes
See text

NaCl

Hydrolysis See text
Hydration Baking soda + water — carbon dioxide
| Osmosis Dehydrating foods, freeze drying, bodily functions

e What happens to water's boiling point and freezing point when you add sugar or water?
e What happens to water’s boiling point and required cooking times when altitude
increases? Why?

Have you ever heard of ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ water? Hard water refers to water that contains
dissolved calcium and magnesium. Water softener adds sodium compounds, and foods cooked
in soft water can add sodium to the food (though this is not a major source of sodium in the
diet). Soap reacts with calcium in hard water, leaving a residue on your hands, dishes, or in your
bathtub. Hard water can also leave scale on the inside of coffee makers, water heaters, and any
other machinery using hard water.

Fruits and Vegetables

This section begins talking about characteristics common to both fruits and vegetables. Then it
moves on to discuss certain topics, such as ripening, that are unique to each group.

Color

Fruits and vegetables get their coloring from 3 pigment groups: chlorophyll (green), carotenoids
(yellow to orange-red), and flavonoids (varies). Chlorophyll and carotenoids are fat-soluble
and are stored in plastids in the plant cell’s cytoplasm. Flavonoids are water-soluble and
include anthocyanins (blue-red, purple), anthoxanthins (colorless, pale yellow), and tannins
(colorless, white, brown). Note that fruits and vegetables can contain more than one pigment.
For example, xanthophylls are yellow carotenoids, but aren't found only in yellow fruits and
vegetables — they are also in kale, spinach, and avocado. Anthocyanins are red but are also
found in small amounts in turnips, which are white.

Chlorophyll is the primary green pigment found in fruits and vegetables and contains
magnesium. When heated or exposed to acid, the magnesium is replaced with hydrogen
resulting in pheophytin which is olive-brown.? In contrast, when chlorophyll-containing foods
are cooked in an alkaline environment, the chlorophyll degrades to phyllins, such as
chlorophyllin, which is bright green.?

Food Science 8
© 2022 Veritense™

> Preserve green color by cooking uncovered, for the shortest amount of time, and in
small batches (rather than holding in steam tables)

Carotenoids are yellow (xanthophylls), orange (carotenes) and red (lycopene, a type of
carotene) and can be found in fruits and vegetables. They are heat and pH-stable, but short
cooking times will help prevent any dulling of the color and will preserve vitamins and flavor.
Here are some examples of fruits and vegetables high in each type of carotenoid:?

> Xanthophylls (yellow): kale, spinach, summer squash, pumpkin, avocado, pineapples,
corn

> Carotenes (orange to red): carrots, cantaloupe, sweet potatoes, papaya, pumpkin,
tangerines, tomatoes (lycopene), winter squash

Flavonoids will intensify in color when exposed to acidic environments but will change colors
when exposed to alkaline environments, including hard water.

> Preserve red and white colors by cooking in a slightly acidic liquid (cream of tartar,
vinegar, or lemon juice)
o Anthoxanthins (white) + base — yellow (ex: cauliflower)
o Anthocyanins (red) + base, excessive heat, or certain metals — blue, blue-green
(ex: red cabbage, beets)
*  Turnips contain anthocyanins in small amounts, which will turn blue if
exposed to alkaline cooking environments
* Metals (cast iron, tin, aluminum) can result in the color change as well, so
use Stainless steel or glass for heating and storage
> Tannins impart astringency (dry or ‘puckering’ feeling, bitter) to certain raw or underripe
fruits. Tannins are also found in some legumes, nuts, grains, as well as in beer, wine,
coffee, and tea. Tannins can also bind certain minerals like iron and zinc, inhibiting
absorption.

Nutrients are lost from fruits and vegetables due to high temperature, long cooking times,
leaching, alkaline environment, plant enzymes, and oxygen (Table 3). Ways to reduce nutrient
losses when processing fruits and vegetables include using less liquid to decrease leaching and
decrease cooking time, avoid holding for long periods in a steam table (or undercook, chill
rapidly, and reheat at service time), and avoid using baking soda. Bromelain, found in
pineapple, and papain, found in papaya, are powerful plant proteolytic enzymes (enzymes that
break down proteins). Bromelain is deactivated at high temperatures but papain is commonly
used as a meat tenderizer. Other foods also contain proteolytic enzymes, though in smaller
amounts, and include kiwifruit, asparagus, sauerkraut, kimchi, yogurt, kefir, and ginger.

Blanching produce slows or halts enzyme action, in order to avoid loss of quality, flavor, color,
texture, and nutrients. If produce has not been blanched before being frozen, it is more
susceptible to browning, because the enzymes are still active.

Did you know? One of the best ways to cook vegetables and retain flavor, color, and nutrients,
is to use the microwave!

Food Science 9

© 2022 Veritense™

Table 3. How to mitigate nutrient loss when processing fruits and vegetables

increseed Nutrient Loss Strategies to Mitigate Nutrient Loss

High temperature Cook at lower temperature

Long cooking time meres liquid; use quick cooking methods; avoid holding in steam

|Oxygen  ==—_| Store in modified atmospheric packaging or airtight containers

e If you cook green beans in water with lemon juice, what will happen to the color of the
vegetables? What if you add baking soda to the water?

e List the 6 factors that increase nutrient loss when cooking vegetables.

e Which pigments are fat-soluble and which are water-soluble? What fruits and vegetables
are they found in?

e How does preserving vegetable color during cooking go hand-in-hand with preserving
nutrient content?

Quality

Plant cells have cell walls that contain lignin, cellulose, and hemicellulose fibers. Humans
cannot digest lignin or cellulose. Lignin is ‘woody’ and will not soften with cooking, but cellulose
and hemicellulose will soften with cooking. Hemicellulose is weaker than cellulose and also
deteriorates with acid, base, and enzymes. Pectin is also present in the cell walls and acts as a
cementing substance. When pectin is combined with acid and sugar it will form a gel. Pectin is
often used in jam and jelly-making.

cytoplasm

nucleus
turgid cell flaccid cell plasmolyzed cell
hypotonic isotonic hypertonic

Ex: produce in water Ex: produce on counter Ex: produce in sugar

or salt water

Figure 4. Water balance in plant cells

Food Science 10
© 2022 Veritense™

Turgor refers to the rigid firmness of a plant cell when filled with water, and is responsible for
produce being firm, crunchy, or crispy (instead of soft and limp). Plant cells, unlike animal cells,
can withstand additional pressure because they have cell walls. Vacuoles inside the plant cell
can fill with water, pressing the cell against the cell wall, increasing turgor (Figure 4). When
excessive water is lost, the cytoplasm will shrink away from the cell wall. How does this
translate to food in your kitchen? You can revive limp produce by placing in water, while you can
observe the effect of plasmolysis by adding salt to a cucumber. Any loss of moisture (due to
solute or heat) can cause plant cells to lose turgidity.

Storage

Respiration is the chemical reaction that transforms glucose into carbon dioxide and water,
using oxygen and releasing energy. We store most fruits and vegetables at refrigerator
temperatures in order to slow down their respiration rate while still Keeping the produce alive.
Respiration is simply the produce using its glucose (stored as starch) to produce energy to stay
alive. When all of the glucose is gone, the produce will deteriorate. Produce with lower
respiration rates will stay fresh longer than produce with higher respiration rates. Nuts and dates
have the lowest respiration rates and broccoli, mushrooms, spinach, and sweet corn with the
highest respiration rates. You might choose to purchase produce such as broccoli and freeze it
(or purchase it frozen) so you can have it on hand without going bad.

Respiration Rate

Very slow “Nuts, dates
Apple, citrus, grape, onion, potato
Moderate Bananas, cherries, pear, fig, lettuce, tomatoes

Fast Strawberries, cauliflower, avocado
Very fast Artichoke, Brussels sprouts
Extremely fast Broccoli, mushroom, spinach, sweet corn

Adapted from Saltveit 20034 with corresponding respiration rates per category as <5 mg COzkg"hr" at 5°C for very
slow, 5-10, 10-20, 20-40, 40-60, and >60 for extremely fast.

Fruits

Fruits are the fleshy product of a plant or tree that contains seeds, and are typically sweet.
Types of fruits include berries, citrus (oranges, grapefruits, lemons, kumquats, limes,
tangerines, tangelos), drupes (peaches, nectarines, plums, apricots, cherries), grapes, melons
(cantaloupe, honeydew, watermelon), pommes (pears, apples), and tropicals (coconut, banana,
figs, dates, mango, papaya, pineapple, pomegranate, kiwi, prickly pear, lychee, persimmon,
dragonfruit, passionfruit).

Berries are juicy and thin-skinned with tiny seeds. Citrus fruits have a thick outer rind and a thin
membrane that separates the fruit flesh into segments. Drupes have an outer skin, soft fleshy
fruit, and a single hard stone (or pit). Melons are large relative to other fruits and have thick skin
and many seeds. Grapes can be seeded or seedless, and come in red, green, and black
varieties. Pommes, or ‘core fruits’ have a core containing the seeds surrounded by thick fruit
flesh and a thin skin. Tropical overlap with other structural categories but are grouped together
as they grow in warm climates and may be considered exotic.

Food Science 11
© 2022 Veritense™

Let’s talk about fruit and ripening. Some fruits are picked when ripe, such as berries, apples,
and pineapples. Other fruits are picked underripe and shipped, like bananas. Tannins are high
in underripe fruits, and give it a characteristic ‘not ready yet’ taste. Remember pectin, in the cell
walls? Fruit contains the most pectin when it is just underripe or ripe. Fruit softens from hard to
‘just right’ because pectin breaks down into pectinic acid. Pectinic acid isn’t as effective as
pectin as forming a gel in the cell wall structure, so the fruit softens. Ethylene gas is emitted
from fruits, and is colorless and odorless. It triggers ripening mechanisms that inactivate acids,
break starch down into sugar, hydrolyze chlorophyl into colorful pigments, break down pectin,
and hydrolyze organic molecules into aromatic molecules. How do these processes contribute
to you assessing whether a fruit at the grocery store is ripe or not? Fruits stored in your
refrigerator continue to emit ethylene gas, which can contribute to other fruits ripening. You can
hasten ripening by placing fruits in a paper bag to capture the ethylene gas. Melons, bananas,
and apples emit the most ethylene gas, and are typically stored separately from other fruits.

Vegetables

Vegetables are any plant, or parts of a plant, that are used as food, including flowers, seeds,
leaves, stems, roots, and underground stems (tubers). Types of vegetables include cabbages or
Crucifera (cauliflower, broccoli, cabbage, Brussels sprouts, Bok choy), fruit vegetables
(tomatoes, eggplant, avocados, cucumbers, peppers), leafy greens (spinach, kale, lettuces,
beet greens, collard greens), onions (onions, garlic, shallots, leeks, scallions), seeds and pods
(corn, okra, legumes (fresh and dried beans and peas)), squashes (Summer squash [zucchini,
yellow squash], winter squash [acorn squash, butternut squash], pumpkin), stems/stalks/shoots
(celery, asparagus, artichokes, fennel, sprouts, pea shoots), and tubers and roots (beets,
parsnips, jicama, water chestnuts, carrots, radishes, turnips, parsnips, potatoes, yams). Fruit
“vegetables” are botanically classified as fruits, but because of how they are prepared and/or
the lack of sweetness, they are commonly considered vegetables.

If you were working in a food service kitchen, your supervisor might ask you to prepare julienned
carrots and chiffonade cucumbers. These are standard vegetable cuts (also called knife cuts) that
you should be familiar with. Descriptions are presented in Table 4. Having standard vegetable
cuts is helpful depending on what the vegetable will be used for (cooked or garnish) and to allow
for even cooking. Though relatively standard, some terminology can vary. For example, some
cooks may say ‘matchstick cut’ and mean %” x 2”, while others may mean 1/8” x 2”. Some may
use the term batonnet instead of julienne, or allumette instead of batonnet. For the exam you
should be aware that knife cuts vary from small to large, why they are useful, that they can be
diced (cubes), stick cuts, or fancy cuts.

Table 4. Standard Vegetable or Knife Cuts

Cut Description Examples and notes

Minced Smaller than brunoise Aromatics (onion, garlic, ginger)
Brunoise (extra small dice) | 1/8” cubes Firm vegetables; ex: turnips, onions,
carrots, leeks
|Smalidice ‘Sasa

Medium dice (cube) %” cubes Use when recipe calls for ‘diced’
Large dice (macedoine) Ys” cubes Vegetables for soups

Food Science 12
© 2022 Veritense™

1/16" x 2”

Julienne (match stick) 4/8” x 2” Commonly used for zucchini, carrots,
celery, cucumber

Allumette 1/4” x 2”
Steak fries
7 sided 2” long barrel Cutting and peeling root vegetables

1/8” slice, perforated Waffle fries
|Rounds =—_| Round disc, specify thickness Ex: %” carrot rounds for roasting
Chiffonade Thin ribbons or shredded Leafy vegetables, herbs

thickness

Chop (rough cut

Sugars
Types of sugar

The term ‘sugar’ typically refers to refined sucrose from sugar beets or sugar cane in its
granulated form. Granulated sugar is also called table sugar. Glucose is sometimes called
dextrose and fructose is sometimes called /evulose.

During the sugar-making process, sugar cane or sugar beets are crushed and the juice is
extracted. The juice is boiled to form sugar crystals which are removed, leaving light molasses.
Dark molasses results from a second boiling and is darker, thicker, and less sweet than light
molasses. Blackstrap molasses comes from a third boiling and is bitter, very dark, and very
thick. Raw sugar is removed from molasses differently than standard granulated sugar and still
contains some molasses, as well as contaminants. Brown sugar contains molasses, ash, and
moisture, giving it a different color, flavor, and texture than granulated sugar. Light and dark
brown sugar refer to the respective type of molasses used.

Organic sugar is derived from sugar cane raised according to USDA organic standards. It
performs the same as granulated sugar, and is used in foods that are labeled organic, as all
ingredients must be organic.

Superfine granulated sugar undergoes screening to ensure uniformly fine-grained sugar
particles meant for use in cakes, meringues, and mixed drinks. It dissolves rapidly. Powdered
sugar, also called confectioner’s sugar, is crushed to even finer particles than superfine
granulated sugar. It typically includes some cornstarch as an anticaking agent.

Invert sugar is a 1:1 combination of glucose and fructose, made by hydrolyzing sucrose in
water (2:1 sucrose to water) and citric acid. Invert sugar is sweeter than sucrose and is used in
candy making. Simple syrup is a 1:1 ratio of sucrose to water and is subtler and lower in
viscosity than invert sugar. Corn syrup is made by partially hydrolyzing corn starch into a liquid
(with acid, base, or enzymes) that is then neutralized, clarified, and concentrated into a syrup. It
is 100% glucose. Corn syrup is less fragile than sucrose, imparts a chewiness to candy
products, and slows crystallization. High fructose corn syrup is corn syrup enzymatically

Food Science 13
© 2022 Veritense™

processed to convert some glucose into fructose, and has a higher fructose:glucose ratio than
invert sugar.

Honey is made up of glucose and fructose and produced by honeybees using flower nectar.

Maple syrup is made by evaporating sap from the maple tree and must be < 35% water and
weight 2 11 pounds per gallon. Imitation maple syrup, or ‘pancake syrup’, is common because
real maple syrup is expensive. Maple sugar is what is left behind after evaporating maple sap,
or evaporating maple syrup. It can be dissolved in solution to form maple syrup. Maple sugar is
made of sucrose, invert sugar (hydrolyzed sucrose), and ash.

High-intensity sweeteners are used as sugar substitutes or sugar alternatives because they
are low or free of calories and sweeter than table sugar. In the US, the Food and Drug
Administration regulates and approves use of high-intensity sweeteners. Instead of reproducing
the information provided on the FDA website, I'll direct you to read through the relatively brief
but informative site: http://bit.ly/SqnfGhk. Note which are approved and for what uses and
conditions. Are there any medical conditions where these sweeteners are contraindicated?
What is an ‘acceptable daily intake’ or ADI? What is the sweetness intensity multiplier?

Functions of sugar

Sugar can affect a food’s texture, taste, color, and moisture. Just as salt can enhance
sweetness without imparting a salty flavor, sugar can enhance savory flavors without imparting
sweetness. In breads, sugar is food for baking yeast. In other baked goods, sugar (along with
fats) provide bulk. In jams, sugar allows pectin gel to form but too much will lead to
crystallization. Sugar concentration in ice cream affects its freezing point. These are just some
examples — more are described in Table 5.

Table 5. Functions of sugar

[Function —S—s| ‘Description = Ci‘ Example
Sweet flavor, calorie source Baked goods, sweets

| Sweetness
| Fermentation

Fermentation Food for yeast

Provides physical bulk; essential for
Volume carbon dioxide production from bakers | Baked goods, breads
east

Texture and structure Required for pectin to gel; stabilizes egg Breads, jam, boiled sweats
white forms; tenderizes starch gels

Decrease freezing point Allows for smaller ice crystals for better Ice cream, frozen desserts
taste and mouthfeel

Decrease water activity | Extend shelf life by binding water ee” products, jams and

Browning and Maillard reaction (sugar + amino acid);

nae rae Confectionary process, toast
caramelization caramelization (sugar + heat

Food Science 14
© 2022 Veritense™

Cereals and Flour

Wheat, barley, rye, corn, millet, sorghum, and rice are all
cereal grasses. The kernel or seed is used to form cereal ansessderte
products (Figure 5) and is made up of 3 edible parts: the bran,
the endosperm, and the germ.

Milling is the process of cracking the kernel using pressure or
friction. Whole grain products consist of all 3 parts in the
same proportions as found in the plant. In contrast, refined
grain products consist of the endosperm only. Enriched
grain products and fortified grain products are refined grains Ptanfematent cteree
enriched and fortified in certain vitamins and minerals —
typically thiamin, riboflavin, iron, and folate. Be familiar with
the parts of a grain, their function, and the nutrients they Figure 5. Composition of a cereal grain
contain. Enriched means nutrients lost during processing are

added back. Fortification means nutrients are added back to higher levels than occur naturally
in the plant. In the US most enriched grains are fortified with folate.

Vitarnn E & tats
Sorne protein

Why were refined grains enriched and fortified in the US? Read this short PDF from the Whole
Grains Council before continuing on in this section: http://bit.ly/3b91BOH.

Why should wheat germ and whole grains be refrigerated?

There are 3 main types of rice: short grain, medium grain, and long grain. Short grain rice is
highest in starch, is sticky when cooked, and the most tender type of rice (ex: arborio rice).
Short grain rice is the best choice for risotto because of its starch content. Medium grain rice is
firm when hot but sticky when cooled. Long grain rice is firm when cooked and the grains do
not clump together (ex: basmati rice, jasmine rice). Brown rice consists of the bran, rice kernel
(endosperm), and the germ. White rice is polished to remove the bran and may be enriched to
replace nutrients lost. Brown rice has more fiber than white rice because it still has the bran,
and thus requires more liquid and takes longer to cook than white rice. Wild rice is a wild water
grass that resembles rice.

Pseudo-cereals, like buckwheat, amaranth, and quinoa, produce a seed that can be milled into
flour or used in other ways similar to cereals.

Flours

Wheat flours are classified by color, season, and texture and in particular the gluten-forming
potential. Wheat can be red or white, planted in the winter or spring, and have a hard or soft
texture. Durum is a very hard wheat with high protein (gluten-forming) content and typically
used for pasta. Hard winter wheat is high in protein with strong gluten and used for bread
flours. Soft white wheat is lower in protein with weak gluten and used for cake flours. All-
purpose flour is a blend of hard and soft wheat. Whole-wheat flour is made from red wheat
while white whole-wheat flour is made from hard white wheat.

Food Science 15
© 2022 Veritense™

Using a bread flour for a cake would result in a less-than-ideal cake texture and using cake flour
for bread would result in a weak bread product. This texture is called crumb. Cakes have a soft
and tender crumb, while breads and pizza have a tight, chewy crumb. Muffins and cookies have
a crumb in-between the two. The takeaway is that there are multiple types of wheat, used to
make different flours, which are used for different purposes. The purpose of a flour is related to
its starch and protein content.

Table 6. Types of wheat flour

‘Flor | Uses Refined | Protein,

|Durumwheatflour | Pasta | High (13%)
Bread flour Bread, pizza High (12 — 14%

| Whole wheat flour | General = | No | High (13-14%

| White whole-wheat flour_| General | No | High (13-14%

Pastry flour Pastries
Cake flour Cakes Yes Low (5 — 8%)

Gluten

Pseudo-cereals and legumes are naturally gluten-free. The cereals that do form gluten include
wheat, barley, and rye. Gluten is a protein formed when we mix or knead flour with water.
Prolamin and glutenin combine to form gluten filaments which form a network that can capture
carbon dioxide and steam during baking, resulting in a fluffy product. If gluten-containing dough
is overmixed, the gluten filaments can be stretched past their elasticity point, breaking the
network and making a stiff dough. The baked good will be dense rather than fluffy.

@ Gliadin S&S
cP water

Glutenin —> ;

Mixing and/or

O kneading
rom Us. +

resting

stretched and
cross-linked
4,

Figure 6. Gliadin (a prolamin in wheat) and glutenin form gluten when water is added. Mixing and/or kneading help form
the gluten network.

Different cereals contain different prolamins, which are round water-soluble molecules. Wheat
contains gliadin, barley contains hordein, rye contains secalin, and oats contain avelin. You
don’t need to know the names of the prolamins in each type of cereal. Glutenin is an insoluble
strand that can stretch. When hydrated, prolamin and glutenin form gluten. Mixing helps ensure
even dispersal of water throughout the flour to begin forming gluten. As mixing continues, or as
the dough is kneaded, the gluten chains become longer and more cross-linked into a webbing

Food Science 16
© 2022 Veritense™

(Figure 6). The network becomes stronger as dough proofs, which makes the dough stronger
and able to withstand any expansion from carbon dioxide and steam. Whole grains contain bran
and germ in addition to protein, and the gran and germ can prevent adequate hydration, leading
to a weak gluten network. Fat in the recipe can slow down gluten formation by coating the
protein strands. Recipes with more fat than normal typically have a longer mixing time (Figure
7). In contrast, salt strengthens the structure of gluten.

Gluten-free diets should exclude wheat, rye, barley, and triticale (a cross between wheat and
rye). Whole grains that are gluten-free are amaranth, millet, teff, buckwheat, and quinoa. Other
grains that are gluten-free include corn (cornmeal/polenta, hominy, grits), rice, and sorghum
(Table 7). Some sources say that oats are naturally gluten-free but often contaminated with
wheat either while growing or during processing.° From a food science standpoint, oats contain
a prolamin, avenin, and glutenin and thus have the potential to form gluten. Tapioca is made
from cassava root and is a gluten-free grain alternative.

<> —_
weaker network
fat because fat coats the
glutenin strands

Mixing and/or salt
kneading

resting

“

network forms quicker
because salt helps form
binding amidst water

Figure 7. The gluten network is inhibited with the addition of fat because fat coats the glutenin
strands. Salt can quicken and strengthen the gluten network by helping with
hydrophobic/hydrophilic reactions with water.

Food Science 17
© 2022 Veritense™

Some products and names to be familiar with (to identify them as wheat, and thus gluten-
containing) include bulgur, kamut, durum, farina, and orzo.

e Bulgur is a type of food made from cracked wheat groats, typically durum wheat.
e Kamut, or Khorasan wheat, is a type of wheat.

e Durum is a type of hard wheat.

e Farina is a type of milled wheat.

e Orzo is a type of pasta shape, like a large rice grain, made from wheat flour.

A patient with celiac disease should avoid what grains? Which grains should they look for
instead?

Table 7. Gluten and gluten-free grains

e Wheat (bulgur, kamut, durum, farina, orzo e Amaranth* e Corn (cornmeal/
and other wheat pasta) e =Millet* polenta, hominy, grits)
e Rye e Teff* e Rice
e Barley e Buckwheat* e Sorghum
e = Triticale e Quinoa*

“Whole-grains.
Starch

Starch can be processed from different types of plants, including corn, wheat, tapioca, potato,
and others. The main culinary use for starch is thickening, and different types of starches have
different thickening abilities. When you add water and heat to starch the starch granules will
absorb the water, swell, and become stickier (leading to clumping). If the goal is to dissolve the
starch in liquid, you should add starch to cold water (called a slurry) and then gradually heat
while stirring. You can also mix starch with a tenderizing ingredient before mixing with water. A
roux is an example, where melted fat is cooked with flour. A brown roux is white roux that has
been allowed to cook until the sugars begin to caramelize.

Modified starches have been altered chemically or physically to create unique functional
characteristics. Pregelatinized starches do not have to be heated in water in order to expand
or gel. Quick cooking grains are pre-cooked, such as quick cooked oats or rice. When starches
undergo dextrinization, or partial hydrolysis, the result is increased sweetness and decreased
thickening because the starch is broken down into sugars. Dextrinization can be done with acid,
heat, or enzymes and typically occurs with dry heat.

Gelation is when starches, like rice or pasta, are cooked in liquid and the starch granules
absorb the liquid. The amylose and amylopectin in those starch granules relax and liquid can
seep between the molecules. The food becomes softer and more digestible. Raw rice and pasta
are hard, but cooked rice and pasta is soft. Starches with a higher level of amylose compared to
amylopectin will gel easier. Retrogradation of starch occurs in when amylose and amylopectin
chains in a cooked, gelatinized starch re-form hydrogen bonds as it cools, causing the liquid to
gel.? As retrogradation occurs, syneresis can happen. Syneresis is the extraction or expulsion of
liquid from a gel. The gel contracts and can leak water, or ‘weep’. Retrogradation decreases

Food Science 18
© 2022 Veritense™

digestibility and can be inhibited fats, glucose, sodium nitrates, or emulsifiers are added to the
starch. Left-over pasta or rice can retrograde and feel hard. One reason bread goes stale is
because it retrogrades.

Sauces

Sauces are liquids that have been seasoned, flavored, and thickened with starch through
gelatinization. There are 5 mother sauces that are used alone or as a base for all other
sauces. Table 8 lists each mother sauce, what is used in the sauce base, its color, secondary
sauces created from the mother sauce, and common uses. You need only know the mother
sauce and base. The other information is to help you remember.

Table 8. The 5 mother sauces

Mother Sauce Base [color] Secondary Sauces Common Uses
Tomato Tomato, roux [red Spanish, Creole cuisine Pasta

Clarified butter, egg yolk, lemon juice

Hollandaise Bernaise, Mousseline Eggs benedict

ellow

Béchamel Milk, flour, butter [white] Cream, mornay, nantua Croque madame
Espagnole Brown stock, brown roux [brown] mae ata bordelaise, Roasted leg of lamb

Sauce vin blanc, sauce
Normandy

Velouté Light stock, white roux [light] Chicken and potatoes

Milk and Dairy Products

Milk is made up of water, carbohydrates, fats, and protein, with water making up 87% of its
composition. The carbohydrates include the disaccharide lactose, which some people are
trouble digesting. Pasteurized milk can be treated with lactase, an enzyme that cleaves lactose
into galactose and glucose. The main form of fat in milk is triglycerides with a large variety of
fatty acid composition. Most of milk protein is casein (80%). Whey makes up 20% of the
protein.’ Casein digests slower than whey in the body, and the 2 proteins have slightly different
amino acid structure.” Casein and whey protein powders, often used as dietary supplements,
are derived from milk.

Milk processing involves homogenization and pasteurization. Homogenization refers to the
mechanical process that breaks up the fat globules in milk into smaller globules that are
permanently dispersed in the colloid system rather than clumped together. Homogenization
makes commercial milk a stable emulsion.

Milk is pasteurized to destroy pathogens and inactivate enzymes, extending shelf life. Raw milk
is unpasteurized milk and can carry dangerous bacteria that cause tuberculosis, typhoid fever,
and scarlet fever, as well as foodborne illnesses like salmonellosis and campylobacteriosis. The
FDA has strict regulations on raw milk and cheese made from raw milk.

Low temperature, or vat, pasteurization involves heating homogenized milk to at last 145°F
and holding for 30 minutes. This is typically done for preparing milk for cheese, yogurt, and
buttermilk starter cultures. High temperature short-time pasteurization (HTST) is the most
common pasteurization in the US and involves heating milk to at least 161°F for at least 14
seconds and then rapidly cooling the milk. Milk or milk products that have fat above 10%, low

Food Science 19
© 2022 Veritense™

temperature pasteurization and HTST temperatures should increase by 5°F. Higher-heat
shorter-time pasteurization (HHST) has a variety of time-temperature standards that you don’t
need to memorize but rather be aware that HHST is in between HTST and ultra-pasteurization.
Ultra-pasteurization (UP) heats milk to at least 280°F for 2 seconds and extends shelf life
longer than HTST and HHST but the product still requires refrigeration. Ultra-high temperature
pasteurization (UHT) is done under sterile and aseptic conditions and results in a product that
does not need to be refrigerated. UHT changes the flavor of the milk.

Table 9. Types of Milk Pasteurization

_Typeof Pasteurization = «(Description = RReefrigeration?
Low temperature (Vat 62°C 145°F for 30 mins Yes
High temperature Short-Time (HTST) | 72°C (161°F) for 15 sec
89°C (191°F) for 1 sec

90°C (194°F) for 0.5 sec
Higher-Heat Shorter-Time (HHST) 94°C (201°F) for 0.1 sec
96°C (204°F) for 0.05 sec
100°C (212°F) for 0.01 sec

Ultra-Pasteurization (UP 138°C (280°F) for 2 sec
Time and temperature vary and are verified by
Ultra-High Temperature (UHT) FDA; must be done under sterile and aseptic No
conditions

Source: Code of Federal Regulations, FDA® and International Dairy Foods Association?

Types of milk are classified according to fat content. Other dairy products are classified by their
MSNF content. Milk solids-not-fat (MSNF) refers to the serum solids or lactose, casein, whey,
and minerals of milk. MSNF are used in ice cream production for the protein content, which acts
as an emulsifier, enhances whipping properties, and increases viscosity and reduces iciness
because protein can bind moisture. Other dairy products, such as yogurt, include MSNF in their
definitions. Low-fat milk and low-fat yogurt can be fortified with vitamin A. All milks are fortified
with vitamin D. Vitamin D was originally added to milk to help prevent rickets in the population
and while milk does contain many minerals, it is low in iron. Milk and dairy products are typically
sold in opaque containers because the riboflavin in milk can be destroyed by light. Before being
processed into dairy products, all milk is homogenized and pasteurized.

Cheese is classified by its milk source, fermentation process, ripening conditions, pressing
method, size and shape, bacteria used, place of origin, and packaging. Most cheeses, unless
made from nonfat or low-fat milk, have 50% of calories from fat. Curing refers to aging cheese
in temperature-controlled and humidity-controlled conditions. Ripening refers to the changes
(chemical and physical) that occur during curing. Cheese can be ripened using bacteria or mold.
Cheese is made by treating pasteurized, homogenized milk with enzymes or acid. Rennet, an
enzyme sold for cheese making, causes casein to clot and form curds. Cream cheese and
cottage cheese are made via acid coagulation and as a result have lower calcium content than
enzyme clotted cheese. Cheese with high fat and moisture content is better for meltability.
Pasteurized processed cheese is a blend of natural cheeses that are shredded, emulsified,
heated, and formed for even better melting properties.

Food Science 20
© 2022 Veritense™

Table 10. Milk and dairy products

Skim milk
Half-and-half 10 — 12% fat
Light cream 18 — 30% fat
30 — 36% fat, also called ‘light whipping cream’
Heavy cream 2 36% fat, also called ‘heavy whipping cream’
| Sourcream ——————C—CC*di’«C 18% fat, light cream treated with cultured lactic acid bacteria

Non-fat sour cream Nonfat milk treated and thickened with stabilizers
Butter 2 80% milk fat

varieties include MSNF
<5% moisture, <1.5% milk fat by weight
Buttermilk Low-fat milk treated with cultured lactic acid bacteria

Milk with 60% water removed and corn syrup or sugar added
jlcecream Mixture of milk, sweeteners, flavorings; 2 10% milkfat before addition of
functional ingredients
2 10% milkfat and 2 1.4% egg yolk solids
Very hard cheese Higher in calcium, includes asiago, i parmesan; 30% moisture
Mozzarella, gorgonzola, blue, Roquefort, gouda, stilton, muenster; 40-50%
emi-soft cheese :
moisture
Soft cheese Cottage cheese; 50-75% moisture
Ripened soft cheese Camembert, brie
Precipitation is when proteins coagulate or precipitate in a liquid, such as milk curdling. It can
occur due to heat or an acidic environment. To prevent protein precipitation (curdling), add

acidic ingredients to protein-containing ingredients, rather than the other way around. For
example, add vinegar into milk, rather than milk into vinegar. '

Imitation dairy products are made from nondairy ingredients such as soy protein, corn syrup,
and vegetable fats along with stabilizers, emulsifiers, and flavorings to imitate dairy products.

Eggs

An egg is made up of a shell, egg white, and yolk. The egg white contains protein and riboflavin.
The egg yolk contains fat, protein, vitamins, and cholesterol. Egg white contains avidin, a
protein that binds biotin. Cooking denatures avidin. Egg protein is considered the reference
protein to which other animal and plant proteins are compared to for quality. Eggs are
economical, versatile, easily digested, and soft to eat. They are also a key source of choline.
Eggs serve key functions in food production including structure, emulsification, aeration, flavor,
and color. Egg substitutes are made from soy or milk protein but do not offer the same
coagulation properties as eggs without the addition of enzymes or acid.

e What function does choline play in the body?

Food Science 21
© 2022 Veritense™

The temperature at which an egg-containing dish will coagulate depends on what part or parts
of the egg that is used. The egg white starts to coagulate at 60°C (140°F) and is completely
coagulated by 70°C (158°F). The egg yolk begins coagulating at a higher temperature of 62°C
(144°F). Whole beaten eggs will coagulate at 69°C (156°F). Scrambled eggs made with milk will
coagulate at 82°C (180°F). Coagulation is slowed by adding sugar and sped up by adding
vinegar or salt. Whipped egg whites (foam) can be stabilized with acid or sugar.

Egg shells can be contaminated with salmonella from the hen. Eggs can be pasteurized or
irradiated to destroy bacteria, and eggs should be stored at 45°F to prevent bacterial growth and
penetration of the shell. Undercooked eggs include eggs cooked for less than 5 minutes or to
less than 160°F and in addition to raw eggs, can be a source of foodborne illness. Liquid egg
products are pasteurized per the Egg Products Inspection Act of 1970. Eggs can also be
purchased frozen or dried as whole, whites, or yolks.

Did you know? The gray-green ring in overcooked hardboiled eggs results from the reaction of
sulfur and iron in the yolk.

Meat, Poultry and Meat Alternatives

Meat and Poultry

Meat is made up of muscle fiber, fat, connective tissue, and sometimes bone. Fat is present
around and within the muscle fiber. Fat within the muscle fiber is called marbling and more
marbling results in more tender meat. Most of the fat in poultry is found just under the skin, so
consuming skinless chicken, turkey, or other types will be lower in fat. You can cook poultry with
the skin on to retain moisture, and then remove the skin prior to consumption to lower fat
consumed. Ground poultry can be ground with or without the skin. The latter has a fat content
comparable to ground beef. Ground meats are a mixture of muscle fiber and fat. Ground beef
labeled as a particular cut (ground round, ground sirloin, ground chuck) is leaner than regular
‘ground beef.

Connective tissue includes collagen and elastin and increases with an animal’s age and
exercise. More connective tissue means the meat will be less tender. Collagen is white and can
be softened with hot water while elastin is hard, yellow, and not affected by water or heat.

Types of meat and poultry are listed in Table 11. The time component refers to the typical age
at slaughter, with older animals being larger and resulting in less tender meat or poultry. Pigs (s
4 months) are typically used for pork cuts while meat from hogs is typically used for processed
pork products. Broilers, fryers, and roasters are all chickens raised for meat and choosing which
for a recipe depends on how much food yield you need. In contrast, a stewer (an older laying
hen) needs to be cooked in moist heat methods because the meat is tougher. Capons are
roosters that have been castrated, which results in them developing more body fat. They are
illegal in some countries. Types of poultry not listed in the table include duck, pheasant, goose,
quail, guinea, and squab. Pheasant and squab have light, tender meat comparable to white
meat from broiler chickens.

Food Science 22
© 2022 Veritense™

Table 11. Types of meat and poultry

Meat T Description Poultry Type
i VYo-21
Beef Cattle (cow), 2 years Broiler, Fryer chicken. <12 weeks, 2¥e-3ie
Veal |_ Young calves (cow), 16-18 weeks Roaster Chicken, <8 months, 342-5 Ibs
Lamb |_ Young sheep, 4-12 months Stewer Hen, 2 10 months, 5-7 Ibs
Mutton | Sheep, 1 year Capon Castrated rooster, 6-8 lbs
Pigs (< 4 months) Female (hen), 9-13 Ibs

Pork Turkey

Male (tom), 13-22 Ibs
Goat Also called cabrales Cornish hen Small chicken, 5 weeks

Hogs (> 4 months

Time notes refer to typical age at slaughter

Wholesale cuts are large cuts that can be divided into smaller retail cuts. Retail cuts are
smaller cuts, and even portion-sized cuts, that are available to consumers.

Meats can be cured by smoking, salting, pickling, or drying to preserve them and/or create new
flavors or textures. Processed meats are cured by adding synthetic nitrates, nitrites, salt, and/or
other preservatives to meat.

Tender cuts of meat can be prepared with dry heat, like broiling, roasting, pan-broiling, grilling,
and frying. Older cuts of meat should be prepped with moist heat methods like stewing or
braising. Cuts near the backbone or rib are the most tender (short loin, rib, sirloin) followed by
the shoulders, upper legs, and the toughest cuts from the lower leg, flank, and neck (chuck,
round, brisket, shank). Searing exposes meat to very high temperatures to seal in moisture,
increase flavor, and brown the meat. Carry-over cooking refers to the phenomenon that meat
continues cooking after removed from heat with internal temperature increasing from 5 to 15°F.

Meat Alternatives

Meat alternatives include legumes (particularly soy), nuts, and seeds because they are high in
protein compared to fruits, vegetables, and cereals. Legumes include lentils, peas, soybeans,
peanuts, and dried beans. Fresh beans are considered vegetables. Pulses are the dried seeds
of a legume. Legumes must be cooked to be digestible. Dried legumes should be soaked,
drained, and cooked in fresh water. Adding acid right before legumes are finished cooking can
prevent them from becoming mushy, while adding a small amount of baking soda can speed
cooking at the risk of mushy beans with a soapy taste devoid of thiamin. Canned legumes are
already cooked and just need to be heated. When storing dry legumes, keep them in a cool,
dark, dry place in airtight containers and discard if you see any evidence of mold.

Soybeans come in a green pod and when sold as such, are called edamame. Soybeans are
versatile and are processed into several different soy products commonly used as meat
replacements. Tofu is made by coagulating soybean protein and takes on the flavor of what it is
cooked or seasoned with. Tofu is available as soft, firm, and extra firm. Other soy products
include miso, tempeh, and soy milk (Table 12).

Food Science 23
© 2022 Veritense™

Table 12. Soy products

-SoyProduct Description,
Custard consistency, delicate

Versatile, retains form

Extra firm tofu Grainy texture

Miso Seasoning paste made of soybeans and fermented grain
Tempeh Soybeans cooked with grain and fermented until solid
Soy milk Soybeans ground with water, often fortified with calcium

Tree nuts are made of a seed and dried fruit inside a hard outer shell and include almonds,
Brazil nuts, cashews, hazelnuts, pecans, pistachios, and walnuts. Peanuts are legumes. Peanut
butter and nut butters are a common source of dietary protein. Commonly eaten seeds include
flaxseeds, chia seeds, hemp seeds, sesame seeds, pumpkin seeds, and sunflower seeds.
Tahini is a spread made from sesame seeds. Many nuts and seeds are dry roasted (roasted
without oil) to improve flavor and texture. Nuts and seeds should be stored in the refrigerator or
freezer to maintain quality and avoid rancidity.

Fish

Fish typically refers to finfish, such as tilapia, salmon, mahi mahi, tuna, trout, catfish, and others.
Shellfish have hard shells and include crustaceans like lobster, shrimp, crab, and crayfish, and
mollusks, like clams, oysters, scallops, and oysters. Octopus and squid are also mollusks.

Fish and shellfish are particularly susceptible to spoiling and contamination. A ‘fishy’ odor is
indicative of deterioration. Read more about food safety and fish in the Food Safety study guide.
Read about proper receiving protocols for fish and seafood in the Food Service Logistics study
guide.

Frozen fish is frozen immediately after being caught and is typically of higher quality than fresh
fish (if frozen properly). Cold water fish are typically fattier than warm water fish and shellfish
and contain omega-s fatty acids.

Fish is naturally tender because it has very little connective tissue. Fish and seafood should be
cooked using delicate heat methods and/or moist heat methods and does not require additional
tenderizing. Overcooking fish and shellfish can make the meat tough.

Fish can be purchased in different forms: whole, drawn, dressed, fillets, steaks, cubes, or
sticks. Drawn fish is a whole fish that has been gutted, removing the entrails and gills. Dressed
fish is a drawn fish with the scales and head removed. Fish fillets are boneless lengthwise cuts
from the side of the fish. In contrast, fish steaks are cross-sections from large dressed fish.
Examples include swordfish or tuna steaks. Cubes are small pieces of dressed fish commonly
used in soup or stir fries. Fish sticks are made from pressing small pieces of fish flesh together
that are then breaded.

Food Science 24
© 2022 Veritense™

Fats and Oils

Around 95% of all food lipids are in the form of triglycerides. A lipid’s melting point is the point
at which a solid changes to a liquid. Fats are solid at room temperature; oils are liquid. Fatty
acids can have complicated names but are often abbreviated by the number of carbons and
number of double bonds. For example, butyric acid has 4 carbons and 0 double bonds, and is
abbreviated as 4:0. In Figure 8 you can see the effect that a single double bond has on the
structure of oleic acid (18:1) compared to stearic acid (18:0), a saturated fatty acid. You can
also see the difference in structure between a cis-double bond in oleic acid, and a trans-double
bond (below oleic acid).Five factors influence a lipid’s melting point (Table 13).

Table 13. Five factors that influence the melting point of lipids

Length of carbon chain in carbons results in t melting point
in double bonds results in | melting point

Configuration i her melting point than cis- config

Crystalline formation
Fatty acids

Stearic acid (18:0)

Oleic acid (18:1)

DHA (20:6(n-3))

Figure 8. Saturated fatty acid (stearic acid), unsaturated fatty acid (oleic acid), and polyunsaturated fatty acid (DHA)

Food Science 25
© 2022 Veritense™

Which has a higher melting point? Why? Cover up the far-right column and answer yourself.

Fatty Acid 1 Fatty Acid 2 Answer

Butyric acid (4:0) Palmitic acid (16:0) Palmitic acid, more carbons
Stearic acid (18:0) Oleic acid (18:1) Stearic acid, no double bonds
Myristic acid (14:0) Myristoleic acid (14:1) Myristic acid, no double bonds

Trans-11-octadecenoic acid (18:1) | Cis-11-octadecenoic acid (18:1) Trans- form

Timnodonic acid (20:5) Nisinic acid (20:6) Timnodonic acid, fewer double bonds

Fatty acids with more carbons in the carbon chain have more bonds to break resulting in a
higher melting point. Degree of saturation (number of double bonds) influences melting point
due to how the lipids can fit together. Saturated fats (no double bonds) are straight and can
stack closely, resulting in a solid fat. Unsaturated fats (one or more double bonds) have bends
that prevent them from forming bonds, and have lower melting points. In a similar theme, trans-
fatty acids are straight, like saturated fats, while cis-fatty acids are bent, and have a lower
melting point. Solid fats are crystals suspended in oil. These fat crystals can be a crystals, B
crystals, or B’ (B prime) crystals. Alpha crystals are small and unstable, and B crystals are large
and stable. The size of 8’ crystals are in between a and B and are stable. The melting point is
lowest for a crystals and highest for B crystals. Finally, the number of fatty acids influence the
melting point, with monoglycerides having a higher melting point than triglycerides. The features
discussed here apply to each fatty acid attached to the glycerol backbone, and thus influence
the actual melting point of each monoglyceride, diglyceride, or triglyceride.

Hydrogenation is done to make fats and oils more solid at room temperature by adding
hydrogens to carbon atoms, breaking double bonds, and ‘straightening out’ the lipid molecules
allowing them to fit closely together. It turns unsaturated fats into saturated fats. Partially
hydrogenated oils (PHOs) used to be the major source of dietary trans fats. In 2015, the FDA
determined PHOs are not ‘generally recognized as safe’ (GRAS) and PHOs can no longer be
served in retail food establishments.'° Some trans fats occur naturally, and fully hydrogenated
oils are still allowed.

Interesterification alters how fatty acids are arranged on a triglyceride and can make smaller
fat crystals and thus a creamier product.

Winterization is when oil is chilled until saturated fatty acids begin to crystallize. These
crystallized fats are then removed. Winterized oils will remain clear at refrigerator temperatures.

Rancidity occurs when fats are broken down by water, heat, or light. Volatile compounds lead
to off flavors and aromas. Antioxidants are often added in food processing to prevent rancidity
and extend shelf life. Airtight, opaque storage containers can also delay rancidity.

Food Science 26
© 2022 Veritense™

Functions of fat

Fats can be heated above the boiling point of water and are good heat conductors. Many foods
are cooked in fat as a form of dry heat preparation.

Fat is also a tenderizing ingredient. It can separate gluten strands when cut-in, resulting in a
flaky pastry product. Fat can also coat gluten, resulting in a weaker gluten network and a tender
crumb.

Frying

Foods can be pan-fried or deep fried. Pan frying uses a shallow pin with oil while deep frying
involves submerging food in hot oil. The exterior of deep-fried foods is cooked by oil and the
interior of the food is cooked by steam, resulting in a crispy outside and moist inside.

Foods to be deep fried should be small, tender, and of uniform thickness. Hard vegetables
should be blanched prior to frying. Frying oil should not be over salted and each batch should
not be overcrowded. Oil should be covered for safety and to limit exposure to light. Fat expands
when heated, so pans or pots should not be filled more than half when frying.

Polymerization occurs when free fatty acids link together during frying. These linked FFAs
make the oil more viscous and prone to foaming, leaving a sticky film on fryers and equipment.
Polymerization decreases oil quality and free fatty acids lower the smoke point. Smoke point is
also lowered by addition of salt, water, emulsifiers, and food particles.

Fats and oils are grouped according to smoke point (the point at which they smoke). At higher
temperatures than that, they will flash (flash point) and then burn (fire point), causing grease

fires. Fats and oils with a high smoke point (420°F or higher) is better for frying than fats with a
lower smoke point.

Fat replacements

Fat replacers can be made from carbohydrates, other fats, or protein. Fat replacers are made to
mimic the flavor, texture, or cooking property of fats without the caloric content or characteristics
of certain fatty acids. They are often used in baked goods, salad dressings, frozen desserts,
confections, cake and dessert mixes, and dairy products."

Carbohydrate-based fat replacers are made from starch including corn, cereals, and grains, and
are the largest group of fat replacers. Examples include cellulose, polyols, inulin, dextrins,
gums, and modified food starches. Many gelling agents and thickeners are used to achieve
smooth textures or replace the bulk lost from removing fat.

Fat-based fat replacers are used to replace triglycerides with reduced calorie fats or mono- and
diglycerides that can be used in a smaller quantity than the triglycerides they are replacing (ex.
Dur-Lo® and EC™). Olestra is an FDA-approved fat replacer made from sucrose polyesters
that is calorie-free because it is non-absorbable. It is used to make fat-free chips, crackers, and
other snack foods and causes diarrhea and stomach upset in some people.

Food Science 27
© 2022 Veritense™

Protein-based fat replacers are digested by the body as proteins, and do not provide the same
properties as fat in baking and frying. Simplesse® (GRAS) is used in low-fat frozen desserts,
sour cream, coffee creamer, and salad dressing to mimic texture and creaminess of fat. It is
made of microspheres of egg white protein or whey protein. Dairy-Lo® (GRAS) is a whey
protein concentrate made from denaturing whey until it has fat-like properties and can be used
in low-fat cheese, ice cream, salad dressings, yogurt, and sour cream.

Leavening Agents

Leavening is the process that incorporates air, carbon dioxide, or steam into a food product. Air
can be incorporated physically by beating, whipping, and sifting. Carbon dioxide can be
introduced using baking soda, baking powder, or yeast. Baking soda is sodium bicarbonate
and used to produce carbon dioxide via chemical reaction with liquid and an acid (cream of
tartar, vinegar, lemon juice, buttermilk, yogurt). Baking powder consists of baking soda and
acid, and only requires liquid for activation. Yeast require sugar to produce carbon dioxide.
Steam leavening is accomplished with high heat, turning moisture in the food product into
steam. Steam leavened products typically have eggs to strengthen the batter.

The 3 main types of yeast used in baking are fresh or compressed yeast, active dry yeast, and
quick rise active yeast. Bakers can also use a sponge, or starter, which involves saving dough
from a batch of bread and allowing the yeast to continue to grow, or by creating a new culture
with water, yeast, sugar, flour and optionally yogurt (for bacteria cultures). Note in Table 14 that
the temperature of the liquid required to activate the yeast in the dough differs for each type of
yeast.

Table 14. Types of yeast

Moisture content, shelf-life =| Liquid
Fresh yeast, compressed yeast | 72%, 5 weeks 32-38°C (90-100°F
Active dry yeast 8%, 6 months to 2 years* 40-46°C (104-115°F

Same as active dry yeast but works quicker; may add hotter water
120-129°F) if other ingredients will cool the liquid
Thin liquid mixture of water, yeast, sugar, flour that is fed sugar 1-2
times per week

“Active dry yeast can be held at room temperature in an airtight container for 6 months or in a freezer for up to 2
years

Batters and Doughs

Batters and doughs have structural ingredients and tenderizing ingredients. Flour and eggs are
structural while fat and sugar are tenderizing. The proportion of liquid (milk, egg, fat) to flour
varies for different types of batter. Be familiar with the proportions for pour batter, drop batter,
soft dough, and stiff dough, and what types of baked goods are used for each.

Liquid ingredients and dry ingredients (flour, leavening agent, etc.) can be combined in different
ways. The conventional mixing method creams fat with sugar (incorporating air) and then
alternates adding liquid and flour. The quick mixing method adds fat and milk to dry
ingredients, mixes, adds eggs, mixes again. The muffin method mixes the liquid and dry

Food Science 28
© 2022 Veritense™

ingredients separately and then combines just until the dry ingredients are moistened. The
pastry method cuts fat into dry ingredients and then adds liquid while mixing.

Table 15. Types of Batter and Dough

BatterorDough _| Liquid:FlourRatio |Use 9
|Pourbatter | 4:1 ’
|Dropbatter 11:2 | Muffins, drop cookies

4300 its,

Pancakes, popovers

Soft dough Biscuits, yeast bread
Stiff dough Cut-out cookies, pasta, pie crust

¢ Go to your favorite cookbook or go online and look up some recipes for the 4 types of
batter and dough. Do those recipes follow the liquid:flour ratio mentioned?

Problems in Baking

Moisture evaporates quicker and leavening gases expand more at high altitude, which weakens
the cell structure resulting in a coarse or collapsed product. Recipes should be adjusted to
decrease the amount of leavening, increase moisture, increase protein (flour), and decrease
tenderizing ingredients (fat, sugar).

Overmixing can lead to tunnels, peaked tops, and pale crust. Undermixing can result in low
volume, flat top, or uneven texture. Too little fat or sugar results in a tough product because fat
and sugar are tenderizing agents.

Beverages

There are many types of beverages, including:

e Water e Carbonated drinks* e Sports drinks e Wine
e Coffee e Non-carbonated fruit drinks e Nutraceuticals e Beer
e Tea e Fermented dairy products e Energy drinks e Spirits

*may be sugar-sweetened, low-calorie, calorie-free, and/or caffeinated

Acids, preservatives, colors, and flavors may be added to beverages. Acids include citric acid,
malic acid, and phosphoric acid for tartness. Preservatives include antifungals like benzoic acid
and sorbic acid. ‘Natural’ colors and flavorings mean they are derived from plant products while
‘artificial’ means they are manufactured chemicals. Caramel coloring may also be added, and is
derived from sugar.

Coffee and Tea

Coffee beans are harvested from coffee plants and sold whole or ground after being dried and
roasted. Coffee has complex flavor characteristics and aromas due to hundreds of volatile
compounds, including sulfur, phenolic acids, organic acids, polyphenols, and caffeine. Alertness
and other changes in the central nervous system after consuming coffee are due to
theobromine and caffeine. An average 8-oz cup of coffee as 95 mg of caffeine while a single

Food Science 29
© 2022 Veritense™

espresso has 63 mg of caffeine. Espresso is made by forcing 1.5 oz of very hot water through
finely ground espresso or dark roast coffee beans. Decaffeinated coffee has 3 mg caffeine per
cup. Decaffeination can be done using the solvent method or the non-solvent method and both
occur before beans are roasted. Commonly used solvents are dichloromethane or ethyl acetate.
The non-solvent method uses liquid carbon dioxide to release caffeine from the beans.

Tea is made from young, small leaves of the camellia sinensis shrub. The leaves are then
exposed to air to reduce moisture content, fermented, and then roasted to develop flavor, color,
and reduce moisture content. Black tea is fully fermented, oolong tea is partially fermented, and
green tea is not fermented. Fermentation adds hundreds of compounds that contribute to flavor.
Teas can then be flavored with oils, spices, fruits, nuts, and herbs. Herbal “teas” are made from
the bark, seeds, fruit, and roots of other plants. Lightly brewed tea has around 30 mg caffeine
per cup. Decaffeinated tea must have <2.5% of the original caffeine content. Tea is mainly
decaffeinated using carbon dioxide or ethyl acetate. Carbon dioxide results in the best flavor
and ethyl acetate processing is sometimes labeled as ‘naturally decaffeinated’.

Dairy beverages

Kefir is a fermented milk by adding bacteria and yeast to milk, heating it, cooling it, and allowing
fermentation to occur.

Milk can be flavored with chocolate, strawberry, banana, or other flavors.

Lactose-free or low-lactose milk is made by treating milk with the enzyme lactase or with
Lactobacillus acidophilus.

Alcoholic beverages

The three types of alcoholic beverages are beer, wine, and spirits. Spirits are also referred to as
hard liquor. Beer is brewed from fermented grains with malt, yeast, and hops. Then the beer is
pasteurized to stop fermentation. Twelve ounces of beer has 1 ounce of alcohol (5%).

Wine is made from fermented fruit juice and involves fermenting fruit sugar, racking to allow fruit
solids and yeast to settle, and then aging in casks or tanks. Wines vary greatly according to the
fruit variety and amount of sugar used. Five ounces of wine has 1 ounce of alcohol (12%).

Spirits are distilled from fermented grains, potatoes, corn, agave, sugar cane, or other
botanicals like juniper (gin) by boiling the mixture, vaporizing, cooling, condensing, and
collecting the resulting liquor. One-and-half ounce of spirits contain 1 ounce of alcohol (80
proof).

Inspections and Grading Standards

The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) establishes the grading standards for agricultural
products in the US and offers grade shields, seals, and labels. You can view the website for
more information (httos://www.ams.usda.gov/grades-standards) and check out the fact sheet to
see what the labels and shields look like (http://bit.ly/8onDmwr).

Food Science 30
© 2022 Veritense™

For the exam you need to be aware that different types of foods have different quality categories
(US Fancy vs Grade Standard vs Grade A-—C vs No. 1 — No. 3 vs Prime, Choice, and Select)
and know which refers to the higher quality versus lower quality.

Table 16. USDA Grading Categories for Produce, Dairy, Eggs, Meat, and Poultry

Food —————_—| USDA Grading Categories

Fresh — US Fancy, US No. 1, US No. 2

Fruits Processed — US Grade A (Fancy), US Grade B (Choice), US Grade C
(Standard)
Fresh — US Fancy, US No. 1, US No. 2

Vegetables Processed — US Grade A (Fancy), US Grade B (Extra Standard), US Grade
C (Standard)

Milk Grade A

Butter Grade AA, Grade A, Grade B

Other dairy products | Grade A, Grade B

Shell eggs Grade AA, Grade A, Grade B
USDA Prime (tender, juicy, flavorful — highest in fat and cost)

Beef USDA Choice
USDA Select (leanest

Veal and lamb USDA Prime, USDA Choice, USDA Good

Poult Grade A, Grade B, Grade C

Grains, rice, peas, US 1, US 2, US3

lentils, beans
Varies, but typically US No. 1, US No. 2

Nuts May also have US Fancy, US Extra No. 1, US Select (ex. pistachio in the
shell) or size (extra-large, large, medium, ex. brazil nuts

Peanut Butter US Grade A (Fancy), US Grade B (Choice

Fruits and Vegetables

Grading of fruits and vegetables is voluntary in the US. Grading standards specify color, shape,
size, maturity, and number and degree of defects present in the item. Fresh produce is graded
as US Fancy, US Number 1, and US Number 2. Processed (e.g. frozen) produce is graded as
US Grade A (Fancy), US Grade B (Choice — fruits, Extra Standard — vegetables), and US Grade
C (Standard).'2

Milk and Dairy Products

Milk is graded by bacterial count, with Grade A having <20,000 bacteria per mL fluid. Only
Grade A milk meets FDA standards for sale. Butter can be graded as Grade AA, Grade A, or
Grade B.'* Cheese can be graded as Grade A or Grade B.'?

Egg inspection is required while grading is voluntary. There are 3 consumer grades for shell
eggs.'* Grade AA eggs are the freshest and highest quality. '* Grade A eggs are very high
quality and Grade B eggs are usually used for liquid eggs or baking. Egg grading is done via
candling where eggs are passed in front of a strong light to assess the size of the air sac, yolk
position, and clearness of the egg white. Overall egg size is also considered in grading. Egg

Food Science 31
© 2022 Veritense™

size ranges from jumbo (weighing 30 oz per dozen eggs) to peewee (15 oz per dozen).
Standardized foodservice recipes use large eggs (24 oz per dozen).

Meat and Poultry

In the US, meat inspection is mandatory per the Wholesome Meat Act of 1967. The Federal
Meat Inspection Act of 1906 regulates meats traveling between states and the inspection
includes examining the live animal and the packing plant. Inspection ensures that the meat is fit
for human consumption. Grading is voluntary and evaluates quality. Quality is determined by
degree of marbling, firmness, color, and texture. There are 3 quality grades for beef cuts: prime,
choice, and select. The 3 quality grades for veal and lamb are prime, choice, and good. There
are no quality grades established for pork. Whole beef and lamb carcasses may be yield
graded by the USDA where Yield Grade 1 is the leanest and Yield Grade 5 has the most fat.

Poultry inspection is mandatory and a USDA inspection stamp indicates the product is fit for
human consumption. Grading is voluntary, with grading consisting of the shape, meatiness, fat
distribution, and general appearance. Consumer grades rang from A to C with Grade A being
the highest quality.

Rice, Peas, Lentils, and Beans

The USDA has standards set for rice, whole dry peas, split peas, feed peas, lentils, and beans
under the Agricultural Marketing Act of 1946.'° Quality grading is voluntary. Quality grading
ranges from US 1 (highest quality) to US 3. Quality is assessed based on damage from frost,
weather, disease, heat or defects caused by weevils or other pests as well as assessing the
skin (smooth or wrinkled) and color.

Grains

Under the US Grain Standards Act, the USDA defines grains as barley, canola, corn, flaxseed,
mixed grain, oats, rye, sorghum, soybeans, sunflower seeds, triticale, and wheat.'* Quality
grading is based on moisture, presence of stones, test weight per bushel, and the presence of
whole kernels (grain with % or less of the kernel removed).

Fish and Seafood

Fish and seafood are regulated and inspected by the Food and Drug Administration under the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the Public Health Service Act.'® Part of the FDA
inspection process surrounds food safety and contaminated waters. The US Department of
Commerce is responsible for inspecting fisheries product lots. The fish DNA testing program
targets seafood that is most commonly mislabeled or improperly substituted. You can learn
about the FDA seafood labeling program in a special learning module at http://bit.!y/2NuM17X
(scroll to the bottom).

Food Science 32
© 2022 Veritense™

Food Preservation and Packaging
Drying

Drying methods include sun drying, curing, spray drying, dehydration, tunnel drying, and freeze-
drying. Foods may be dried to reduce water activity to prevent microbial growth and/or to
change the texture of the food.

Spray drying is used to produce powdered products. Particles in a liquid or slurry are atomized
to droplets and as the droplets fall through warmed air, they dry to form a powder. Examples
include milk powder, instant coffee, tea, powdered eggs, cereals, spices, flavorings, and
starches.

Curing uses a large amount of salt to bind water content in a food. Meats and fish may be
cured, with or without smoking. Other ingredients may be added for flavor or for preservation,
such as nitrites.

Dehydration involves removing at least 80% of the water from a food.'® The food can remain
shelf-stable when kept in an airtight container.

Tunnel drying involves foods moving on a conveyor through a chamber of warm air and high
air flow to remove excess surface moisture. It is commonly used to dry produce.

Freeze-drying uses sublimation to create high-quality preserved foods. Sublimation is the
transition from frozen to gaseous state, without first going through a liquid state and is
accomplished by placing frozen foods in a dehydrator. Freeze-dried foods can have better flavor
and color than foods dried with other methods. '

Canning

Canning is done by packing food in sterile cans or jars,
sealed, and then heated to create a vacuum seal.

C. botulinum thrives in low-oxygen and low-acid (pH >
4.5) environments. If canning foods at home, consumers
should use different canning methods for low-acid (pH >
4.5) and high-acid (pH s 4.5) foods.

Low-acid foods should be canned using a pressure
canner, reaching 240°F to destroy spores. Low-acid foods include vegetables, meats, dried
beans, and soups.

High-acid foods can be canned using a water bath canner. Temperatures do not need to reach
above 212°F because the spores cannot survive in the acidic environment. High-acid foods
include fruits, fruit juices, jams and jellies, salsas, tomatoes, pickles, relish, chutneys, sauces,
vinegars, and condiments. With higher altitude, water boils at a lower temperature so canning
processing time needs to increase to yield a safe product.?

Food Science 33
© 2022 Veritense™

Fermentation

Fermentation is the conversion of carbohydrates to carbon dioxide, acids, and alcohol by either
yeast or bacteria. Yeast is a fungus that can ferment sugars and is used in breads (baker’s
yeast), beer (brewer's yeast), wine (yeast), and xylitol production.’ Vinegar and salt may also be
added, such as in pickling.

Refrigeration

Refrigeration temperatures can slow respiration rates of fruits and vegetables and provide
temperatures at which most microbes cannot grow. Controlled atmosphere storage reduces
oxygen and increases carbon dioxide in the air surrounding vegetables and can extend shelf
life.

Freezing

It is best to freeze foods at less than or equal to O°F, or slightly colder. Flavor, nutrient content,
and texture are lost when freezing foods above 0°F.' There are different ways to freeze foods.

e Immersion freezing is when foods are submerged in a low temperature brine solution.

e Air blast freezing quickly freeze food as it passes through the chamber on a conveyor
belt, similar to tunnel-drying but with freezing.

e Cryogenic freezing uses liquid nitrogen or carbon dioxide, reaching temperatures of -
140°F.

e Plate or contact freezing is done by placing food on super-cooled surfaces.

e Individual quick freezing is done so that each piece of food, such as vegetable, is
frozen separately and not cohered to other pieces. Quick freezing results in small ice
crystals which helps maintain product integrity, flavor, and nutrients after defrosting.

Pasteurization

Pasteurization extends the shelf-life of milk and juice by preventing spoilage due to microbial
growth. It involves heating the liquid to a certain temperature for a certain length of time and
then rapidly cooling it to slow the amount of time in the temperature danger zone.

Irradiation

Irradiation can prolong the shelf life of some fresh produce by reducing growth
of bacteria and mold that would otherwise lead to spoiling. Irradiation l 4
causes depolymerization of polysaccharides, cellulose, and pectin which @
results in a less firm produce product, which is why it is only used for some QW
types of produce. Meat can also be irradiated and has a shelf life 3-4 times QJ

longer than fresh meat. Irradiated foods are marked with the ‘radura’ symbol.

oe

Food Science 34
© 2022 Veritense™

Pulsed Light

Pulsed light exposes food to brief intense flashes of light that disrupt bacterial cell membranes
but not the surrounding plant cells.

High Pressure Processing (Pascalization)

Pascalization uses 50,000 pounds per square inch for 15 minutes or longer to destroy microbial
cell membranes. It is typically used for jams, jelly, rice cakes, yogurt, mayonnaise, and
guacamole.

Ohmic Heating

Ohmic heating is also called ‘resistance heating’, ‘joule heating’, and ‘electroheating’. This
method passes electricity through food, rapidly and uniformly heating the product. Microbes and
enzymes are inactivated. Heat sensitive liquids, liquid eggs, stews, fruit in syrup are well suited
to ohmic heating.

Pulsed Electrical Field

Pulsed electrical field preservation is nonthermal and is suitable for liquids and semi-solid foods.
It operates at room temperature and does not affect nutrient composition or food quality. It can
also improve juice yield of produce, as the electric pulses used open large pores in plant cell
membranes.

Ozone

Ozone can be used as a disinfectant and sanitizer. It destroys microorganisms without adding
any chemical byproducts to the food, the water used to process the food, or the environment in
which the food is then stored.

Ultrasonication

Ultrasonication uses sound waves at room temperature to crystallize fats and sugars, degas
foods, filter and dry foods, freeze foods, tenderize meat or produce, ferment foods, and to
produce homogenous mixtures. It also incapacitates microbes and inactivates enzymes.
Compared to other food preservation methods, it can maintain food quality such nutrients
affected by water or heat. Ultrasonication can be used at low-frequencies to modify physical and
chemical properties through pressure, shear, and temperature differences. High frequency
ultrasonication is used to gather information on food physicochemical properties. Ultrasonication
can be used for quality control, such as produce postharvest or to detect product adulteration.

Food Science 35
© 2022 Veritense™

Aseptic Packaging

With aseptic packaging, the packaging material is sterilized prior to packaging and the product
is filled and sealed in a sterile environment.

Modified Atmosphere Packaging

Modified atmosphere packaging, or MAP, involves enclosing food in a package impermeable to
certain gases for the purpose of eliminating gases and/or retaining them. High gas permeable
packaging is used for produce after harvest, like fruits that emit large amounts of ethylene gas.
Low gas permeable packaging is used for pasta and prepared meals.

Sous vide is a way of packing and cooking foods. It involves vacuum packing the food (sealed
container with as much air removed as possible) and then cooking it in a controlled temperature
water bath.

Food Additives

Food additives are any substance used in the production, processing, treatment, packaging,
transportation, or storage of food. The legal definition, “any substance the intended use of which
results or may reasonably expected to result (directly or indirectly) in it becoming a component
or otherwise affecting the characteristics of any food) is intended to support the need for
premarket approvals.'' Ingredients generally recognized as safe (GRAS), approved for use by
the FDA or the USDA do not need to undergo premarket approval before being added to foods.

Direct food additives are added for a specific purpose, such as xanthum gum used in chocolate
milk to add texture. '' Direct additives are listed on the food’s ingredient label. Indirect food
additives become part of food in trace amounts due to packaging, storage, and handling. For
this reason, all materials used in packaging must be approved by the FDA.

The top 4 most commonly used additives in the US food system are sugar, salt, corn syrup, and
dextrose.

Anti-caking Agents

Anti-caking agents are used to keep powdered foods from lumping or caking and to prevent
moisture absorption. They are used in salt, baking powder, and powdered sugar. The anti-
caking agents include silicate, iron ammonium citrate, silicon dioxide, sodium stearate, and
sorbitol.

Preservatives

Preservatives include antimicrobials and antioxidants. They are used in fruit sauces, fruit
jellies, beverages, baked goods, cured meats, oils, margarines, cereal, salad dressings, snack
foods, fruits, and vegetables.

Food Science 36
© 2022 Veritense™

Antimicrobials are used to prevent growth of molds, fungi, bacteria, and yeast that would spoil
food and possibly lead to foodborne illness. Sodium benzoate inhibits mold and bacteria
growth under acidic conditions. It is used in carbonated drinks with carbonic acid, in salad
dressings and pickles with vinegar, and in jams and fruit juices with citric acid.

Propionates are used to prevent mold and bacterial growth in breads and baked goods and
include calcium propionate, sodium propionate, and potassium propionate.

Other antimicrobials include sulfites, caprylic acid, potassium sorbate, sodium nitrate, sodium
nitrite, and sulfur dioxide. Nitrates can also ‘fix’ color in a product, while inhibiting formation of
C. botulinum spores.

Sulfites are also used in wine and vinegar production to control fermentation, which is why
sulfite levels are often discussed in wine tasting. They can also prevent enzymatic activity that
leads to browning (ex. dried fruits, shellfish). Sulfites must be listed on ingredient labels.

Antioxidants prevent oxidation, which can lead to rancidity in oils and lipids and browning in
fruits. Oxidation can also lead to ‘off flavors and aromas and thus antioxidants can extend
product shelf-life. The most commonly used FDA approved antioxidants include propyl gallate,
butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT). They are often added to
frozen foods that contain fat (including frozen meats). Others include ascorbic acid (vitamin C),
citric acid, erythorbic acid, sodium erythorbate, sulfur dioxide, tartaric acid, and tocopherol
(vitamin E).

Because metal contaminants can cause oxidation, chelating agents like citrate, ascorbate,
phosphate, and EDTA may also be added.

Bleaching agents

Bleaching agents are used primarily in flour to remove natural yellow pigments. Bleaching
agents can also modify how gluten forms in baked goods for improved baking results. Benzoyl
peroxide is used to whiten flour. It reacts with the carotenoids naturally found in flour and
oxidizes them. Other bleaching agents include acetone peroxide and hydrogen peroxide.

Emulsifiers

Emulsifiers allow ingredients to mix well together, keep emulsified products stable, reduce
product ‘stickiness’, control levels of crystallization, and can help products dissolve easier in
liquid. They also improve the texture and uniformity of ice cream and dairy products. For
example, diglycerides are often used in frozen desserts, shortening, and margarine to improve
texture, stability, volume, softness, aeration, homogenization, and extend the shelf life of a food.

Lecithin is a very effective emulsifier and may be listed as soy lecithin or egg yolk. Other
common emulsifiers include monoglycerides, polysorbates, propylene glycol monostearate,
sorbitan monostearate, disodium phosphate, modified cellulose, and some galactomannans.'”

Food Science 37
© 2022 Veritense™

Flavors and flavor enhancers

A flavor enhancer is a product added to enhance a food's taste profile without adding a
distinctive flavor of its own. They are used in many processed foods. Flavor enhancers are
therefore added at the sub-threshold level, such as adding salt to increases sweetness (but not
being able to taste the salt). Commonly used flavor enhancers are salt acids, amino acids like
MSG, and sugars.? Others include plant extracts, herbs, spices, vanilla/vanillin, hydrolyzed
vegetable protein, disodium inosinate, and synthetic flavors.

Nutrients

Fortification is adding vitamins or minerals that either aren’t present naturally in a food, or
adding back in an amount greater than naturally found. Enrichment is replacing vitamins and
minerals lost during food processing. Flour, breads, cereals, rice, macaroni, margarine, salt,
milk, fruit, beverages, energy bars, and instant breakfast drinks are often enriched and/or
fortified. Nutrients you may see on ingredient labels include thiamine hydrochloride, riboflavin,
niacin, niacinamide, folate, folic acid, 8 carotene, potassium iodide, iron, ferrous sulfate, a
tocopherols, ascorbic acid, vitamin D, amino acids like L-tryptophan, L-lysine, L-leucine, and L-
methionine."

Sequestrants

Sequestrants ‘sequester’ trace metals found in foods, meaning they form a tightly bound
complex to prevent deterioration of the food. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) is a
commonly used sequestrant in foods and beverages. Calcium disodium EDTA is also used as a
sequestrant.

Color additive

This section discusses the approval process in the United States and does not go over direct
color additives that are approved in the EU or Japan but not the US.

Color additives are dyes, pigments, or substances that when added to foods, drugs, or
cosmetics, are capable of imparting color alone or through reactions with other substances.
Color additives are used to 1) offset color loss, 2) correct natural variations in color, 3) enhance
natural colors, and 4) provide color to colorless food. '' Certified colors are manmade and used
because they are less expensive than natural colors and impart intense, uniform colors. There
are 9 certified color additives. All certified color additives must be listed on ingredient labels.
Colors exempt from certification are those derived from vegetables, minerals, or animals
(natural sources). ''

Be familiar with the different color names and if a question on the exam asks you which color
might be used for a certain product, be able to match the color. For example, know that turmeric
is yellow and titanium dioxide is white. The next time you're at the grocery store, take a look at
the ingredients in different colored foods, like sprinkles, gelatin desserts (Jell-O), frozen
desserts, energy drinks, and snack foods.

Food Science 38
© 2022 Veritense™

Table 17. Color additives approved in the US

Certified Colors (FD&C

Blue #1 (Brilliant blue) Annatto extract (yellow) Titanium dioxide (white)

Blue #2 (Indigotine) Beet powder (blue-red to brown) Riboflavin (orange-yellow)

Green #3 (Fast green FCF) Caramel (yellow to tan) Spirulina extract (blue)

Red #3 (Erythrosine, pink) B-carotene (Yellow to orange) Chlorophylls and chlorophyllin (green)

Red #40 (Allura red) Turmeric, curcumin (yellow) Tagetes meal, luteins (yellow)

Yellow #5 (Tartrazine) Anthocyathins, grape color extract Paprika extract (deep red)

Yellow #6 (Sunset Yellow FCF) | (red, blue, purple) Lycopene (red)

Orange B Saffron (yellow) Calcium carbonate (white)

Citrus Red #2 Cochineal extract, carmine (orange to | Iron oxides (black, red, yellow, brown)
red)

Source: Food and Drug Administration, '® International Association of Color Manufacturers'®

Orange B is only approved for use in hot dog and sausage casings and Citrus Red #2 is only
approved to color orange peels. Tartrazine, or FD&C Yellow #5, may cause allergic reactions
such as itching and hives in some people, particularly those sensitive to aspirin.'* People may
have sensitivity or allergic reactions to other color additives as well. Cochineal extract, or
carmine, is used to color meat products, seafood, confections, alcoholic and soft drinks,
vinegar, yogurt, baked goods, jams and jellies, snack and convenient foods, seasonings, and
dairy products. Carmine must be listed on ingredient labels, even though it is exempt, because
of potential allergic reactions.

Let’s discuss some of the natural colors. Annatto extract is one of the oldest food colorings
used particularly in cheese. It is now used to add yellow colors to a variety of foods. Paprika
extract can be used for color and/or flavoring and is used to color meat products, sweets,
vegetable oils, surimi (imitation crab), and convenience foods. Tagetes, or Aztec marigold, meal
and extract is a major source of luteins for yellow colorings. It is used in a variety of food
products including infant and toddler foods. Turmeric, or curcumin, is used in condiments
(pickles, mustard, seasonings, relish), snacks, baked goods, sauces, salad dressings, oils,
margarines, frozen desserts, baked goods, confections, beverages, meat, seafood, soups, and
other foods.'? Caramel is one to the most common natural colorings and is frequently added to
soft drinks and alcoholic beverages. It is also used in sweets, bakery products, dairy products,
meat, seafood, sauces, and snack foods.

Humectants

Humectants are used to keep foods products moist, and include glycerin, glycerol
monostearate, propylene glycol, and sorbitol (and other sugar alcohols)."'

Leavening agents

Leavening agents promote the rising of baked goods and breads. They include baking soda,
monocalcium phosphate, and calcium carbonate."

Food Science 39
© 2022 Veritense™

pH control and acidulants

Additives used to control acidity or alkalinity help improve flavor, texture, and cooking quality.
They can also help maintain a pH environment hostile to microbial growth. Main pH control
agents include lactic acid, citric acid, ammonium hydroxide, and sodium carbonate. Others
include acetic acid, malic acid, phosphoric acid, potassium acid tartrate, sodium citrate, and
tartaric acid.

Stabilizers, thickeners, binders, and texturizers

Additives in this category help provide a uniform texture throughout a product and to improve
‘mouth-feel’, such as when fat is removed from a product. They are used in frozen desserts,
dairy products, cakes, pudding mix, gelatin mix, salad dressings, jams, jellies, and sauces. "'

Pectin is often used as a thickener, particularly in jams and jellies, and acts as a natural
cementing agent. Food gums are often added to processed foods to increase their viscosity,
including ice cream, candy, and salad dressing. Examples include guar gum, Arabic gum,
vegetable gums, and xanthum gum. Other stabilizers and thickeners include calcium alginate,
cellulose, carrageenan, cornstarch, whey and modified food starch. Carrageenan is a
polysaccharide derived from seaweed.

Gelling agents are added to create gels. Gelatin, starch, pectin, and agar can be used to
create gels. Agar is a polysaccharide derived from algae. Many gelling agents are also
stabilizers.

Yeast Nutrients

Calcium sulfate and ammonium phosphate may be listed in the ingredient label for breads and
baked goods because they are used to promote yeast growth.

Sweeteners

Sweeteners are used to add sweetness to foods and beverages, either with or without extra
calories. They are used in beverages, baked goods, confections, table sugar, substitutes, and
many processed foods. Sweeteners include sucrose (sugar), glucose, fructose, sorbitol,
mannitol, corn syrup, high fructose corn syrup, saccharin, aspartame, sucralose, acesulfame-K,
and neotame.

Dough Strengtheners and Conditioners

Ammonium sulfate, azodicarbonamide, and L-cysteine can be used to produce a more stable
dough in breads and other baked goods.

Firming Agents

Processed fruits and vegetables may have firming agents used to maintain crispiness. Firming
agents include calcium chloride and calcium lactate.

Food Science 40
© 2022 Veritense™

Enzyme Preparations

Enzyme preparations are used to modify proteins, polysaccharides, and fats in cheese, dairy
products, and meats. They include lactase, papain, rennet, chymosin, or may just be listed as
“enzymes”.

Gases

Gases are used as propellants, aerators, or to create carbonation in food products like oil
cooking spray, whipped cream, and carbonated beverages. Gases used include carbon dioxide
and nitrous oxide.

Food Preparation

There are different types of heat transfer.

e Conduction is the direct transfer of heat.

e Convection is the transfer of heat by air or liquid.

e Radiant heat or radiation is the transfer of heat in the form of waves.
e Induction is the transfer of heat without contact.

Dry Heat

Dry heat cooking uses heat transfer by air, radiation, fat, or metal and method includes
baking/roasting, broiling, grilling, frying, sauteing, and stir frying. Descriptions are provided in
Table 18.

Table 18. Dry heat cooking methods

Heat from oven cooks food through convection, Meats, vegetables, casseroles,
conduction, and/or radiant heat baked goods

Intense heat and nearness to oven heating Tender meat and poultry cuts
element controls degree of browning from above _| Fish

Heat applied from below with radiant heat
Grilling cooking the surface and conduction cooking the
food interior

Panfrying with a small amount of oil or deep

. re : : : Meat, fish, poultry
Frying frying, immersing the food in hot oil, cooked
through conduction Potatoes, other vegetables

‘Sauteing | Heats and cooks food via conduction veats: en pony
. Heated oil in a deeper pan than used for sautéing
Stir fry cooks food rapidly via conduction Chopped meats and vegetables

The Maillard reaction is a chemical reaction (a non-enzymatic reaction) between an amino acid
and sugar that results in browning when heated. It creates flavors and colors in foods such as
browning of meat when seared or grilled and poorly characterized but often utilized flavors, such
as umami, and is responsible for air frying. When cooking meats, using a dry heat method first
will help brown the meat and impart better flavor. When you see the term ‘brown’ or ‘browning’,
it is referring to the Maillard reaction. The protein in egg and/or milk used in an egg wash on

Baking, roasting

Broiling

Meat, fish, poultry
Vegetables, some fruits, pizza

Food Science 41
© 2022 Veritense™

pastry facilitates browning while the pastry bakes. The fat (from egg yolk or milk) gives a shiny
appearance to the baked good. You can find images online of what a pastry looks like after
different combinations of whole egg, egg yolk, egg white, with water, milk, or cream. In contrast,
enzymatic browning which occurs via oxidation when cut produce is exposed to oxygen.
Enzymatic browning reduces (good) flavor and nutritional value.?°

Caramelization is another type of non-enzymatic browning. It occurs at higher temperatures
than the Maillard reaction and does not involve amino acids. Caramelization, such as cooking a
high-sugar fruit or vegetable like onions, carrots, or apples or firing the sugar on a creme brilée,
will produce new flavors.

Moist Heat

Moist heat cooking uses heat transfer by water, liquid, or steam, and methods include
poaching, stewing, simmering, braising, boiling, blanching, steaming, and microwaving.

Table 19. Moist heat cooking methods

Food is immersed in liquid (just below boiling
temperature) until cooked.

immersing food in boiling liquid for brief period to
Blanching inactivate enzymes, then rapidly cooled in ice Vegetables, fruits
water

Steaming =| Food| held above boiling water and cooked via Vegetables, fish
Food added to water as it is brought to boiling, or | Dry pasta, beans, hardy vegetables,
g added to boiling water. candy, sauces

Liquid held below boiling, with small bubbles

Poaching Fish, eggs

breaking the surface. Used to reduce liquid Vegetables, sauces, soups, delicate
volume, gently cook delicate food, or keep boiled | meat
foods warm

Food is simmered longer and with less fluid than Tough meat or poultry cuts, fish
simmering’ method, and the fluid becomes part vegetable stews
of the sauce (stew
Food browned via dry heat and then braising
Braising liquid added for flavor and moisture as the food
stews
Efficient cooking method that maintains nutrients,
Microwaving polar molecules in the food (water or fat) rotate Any food, also used for reheating
and produce energ

Food Science 42
© 2022 Veritense™

Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering

To learn about food biotechnology, read the following webpages and articles.

e Biotechnology FAQ, US Department of Agriculture:
https:/Awww.usda.gov/topics/biotechnology/biotechnology-frequently-asked-questions-fags

e Wieczorek A. Use of Biotechnology in Agriculture — Benefits and Risks. Biotechnology.
2003. Cooperative Extension Service. University of Hawai’i at Manoa.

https:/Awww.ctahr.hawaii.edu/oc/freepubs/pdf/bio-3.pdf
e Biotechnology and Food. Arizona Cooperative Extension. 2008.

https://extension.arizona.edu/sites/extension.arizona.edu/files/pubs/az1066.pdf

e How GMOs are Regulated for Food and Plant Safety in the US. Food and Drug
Administration. https:/Awww.fda.gov/food/agricultural-biotechnology/how-gmos-are-
regulated-food-and-plant-safety-united-states

e GMO Crops, Animal Food, and Beyond. Food and Drug Administration.
https:/Awww.fda.gov/food/agricultural-biotechnology/gmo-crops-animal-food-and-beyond

e Science and History of GMOs and Other Food Modification Processes. Food and Drug
Administration. https:/Awww.fda.gov/food/agricultural-biotechnology/science-and-history-
gmos-and-other-food-modification-processes

Study Guide Questions

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your first pass at
applying the knowledge you've read and practiced in example calculations in a question-and-answer
format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your notes. Because these questions
are intended to be used as a guide to apply your knowledge and develop your critical thinking skills, not a
test, and because the answers are in this document, there is no answer sheet.

1. Describe how granulated sugar is made.
What gives the unique flavor result to Maillard reactions?

sd

List the types of wheat flour in order from highest to lowest protein content. What types of baked
goods require higher protein flour? Why?

What batter ingredients are structural and which are tenderizing? What does that mean?
Compare polymerization and hydrogenation.

What are the 3 types of leavening? What is required for each?

List the 4 types of batters/doughs and their liquid-to-flour ratio.

Define dextrinization, gelation, and retrogradation.

oaonNnon >

What is the difference between a slurry and a roux?

10. Order the following from lowest to highest coagulation temperature: whole beaten eggs, eggs with
milk, eggs with salt, egg yolk, egg white.

11. Why might you sear a roast on the stovetop before braising it?

12. Use an active learning technique to organize and learn the information about food additives.

Food Science 43
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions

Answer these practice questions using the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™ that you read about in
Chapter 2 and 3 of the Study Smarter Method for the RD-Exam section. Instead of answering these
questions using your memory and logic, use the study guide text and/or your own research to determine
which answer is correct (and why), and why the other answers are incorrect. Pay attention to the question
itself, and be sure you know what the question is asking. There are answers with explanations following.
If this is your first set of practice questions, go back and skim Chapters 2 and 3 in the Study Smarter
Method for the RD-Exam section to remind yourself of the types of questions and how to answer them.

1. Polymerization can occur during ___—s and oil quality.
a. frying, decrease
b. frying, increase
c. baking, decrease
d. baking, increase

2. What type of batter or dough has a 1:3 liquid to flour ratio?
a. Drop batter
b. Pour batter
c. Soft dough
d. Stiff dough

3. The muffins baked for a catered breakfast have peaked tops and tunnels. What went
wrong?
a. Batter was undermixed
b. Batter was overmixed
c. Not enough fat
d. Oven too hot

4. Persons with phenylketonuria should avoid what high-intensity sweetener?
a. Acesulfame-K
b. Sucralose
c. Aspartame
d. Saccharin

5. Baked goods made with a high flour have a crumb.
a. protein, tender
b. protein, chewy
c. starch, chewy
d. None of the above

6. What type of pasteurization results in a shelf-stable product that does not require
refrigeration?
a. High temperature short-time
b. Higher-heat shorter-time
c. Ultra-pasteurization
d. Ultra-high temperature

Food Science 44
© 2022 Veritense™

7. You like to recommend a list of whole grains to your patients with Celiac disease rather
than only telling them what they should not have. On your list, you have:
a. corn, oats, buckwheat, amaranth
b. millet, buckwheat, quinoa, amaranth
c. bulgur, amaranth, teff, quinoa, buckwheat
d. rye, hominy, sorghum, millet

8. “One” alcoholic drink is considered to be of beer, _ of wine, or of spirits.
a. 12,5, 1.5
5,5, 12

9,
5

o1

aoe
mo —
co Mm

9. The alertness and other CNS simulation from coffee is a result of caffeine and

polyphenols
sulfur

amino acids
theobromine

200

10. Regular coffee has __ mg caffeine per 8 oz while decaffeinated coffee has_— mg
caffeine per 8 oz.
a. 175,8
b. 150,5
c. 95,3
d. 90,3

11. Which freezing process results in the highest quality frozen product?
a. immersion freezing
b. cryogenic freezing
c. contact freezing
d. individual quick freezing

Food Science 45
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Answers)

1. Polymerization can occur during and oil quality.
a. frying, decrease
b. frying, increase
c. baking, decrease
d. baking, increase

Answer: A. Polymerization occurs when free fatty acids link together during frying and make the oil
viscous and of poorer quality.

2. What type of batter or dough has a 1:3 liquid to flour ratio?
a. Drop batter
b. Pour batter
c. Soft dough
d. Stiff dough

Answer: C. Pour batter has a 1:1 ratio, drop batter has a 1:2 ratio, and stiff dough as a 1:4 ratio.

3. The muffins baked for a catered breakfast have peaked tops and tunnels. What went wrong?
a. Batter was undermixed
b. Batter was overmixed
c. Not enough fat
d. Oven too hot

Answer: B. Muffins with tunnels, peaked tops, or pale crust result from overmixed batter. Undermixed
dough will result in muffins that don’t rise or have an uneven texture. Muffins without sufficient fat or sugar
(tenderizing ingredients) will be tough or coarse. Baked goods with a hump in the center may be from an
oven at too high of a temperature.

4. Persons with phenylketonuria should avoid what high-intensity sweetener?
a. Acesulfame-K
b. Sucralose
c. Aspartame
d. Saccharin

Answer: C. Aspartame contains phenylalanine, which persons with PKU cannot metabolize.

5. Baked goods made with a high flour have a crumb.
a. protein, tender
b. protein, chewy
c. starch, chewy
d. None of the above

Answer: B. High protein flour results in a chewy or tight crumb. Low protein flour results in a tender or soft
crumb.

6. What type of pasteurization results in a shelf-stable product that does not require refrigeration?
a. High temperature short-time
b. Higher-heat shorter-time
c. Ultra-pasteurization
d. Ultra-high temperature

Food Science 46
© 2022 Veritense™

Answer: D. HTST, HHST, and UP products all require refrigeration. Ultra-high temperature products do
not.

7. You like to recommend a list of whole grains to your patients with Celiac disease rather than only
telling them what they should not have. On your list, you have:
e. corn, oats, buckwheat, amaranth
f. millet, buckwheat, quinoa, amaranth
g. bulgur, amaranth, teff, quinoa, buckwheat
h. rye, hominy, sorghum, millet

Answer: B. While corn, rice, sorghum, and oats do not contain gluten, they are not whole grains. Oats
are also often contaminated with gluten during growing or processing. The whole grains that are gluten-
free are amaranth, millet, teff, buckwheat, and quinoa. Wheat, including bulgar, kamut, durum, farina, and
pastas, rye, barley, and triticale (a cross between rye and wheat) all contain gluten.

8. “One” alcoholic drink is considered tobe ___——s of beer, ——s of wine, or__ of spirits.
a. 12,5,1.5
b. 1.5,5, 12
c. 8,5,2
d. 2,5,8

Answer: A. One drink is one ounce of alcohol, which is present in 12 oz of beer, 5 oz of wine, or 1.5 oz of
spirits.

9. The alertness and other CNS simulation from coffee is a result of caffeine and
a. polyphenols
b. sulfur
c. amino acids
d. theobromine

Answer: D. Coffee contains theobromine and caffeine which are the 2 ingredients responsible for the
‘stimulation’ side effect of the beverage.

10. Regular coffee has__ mg caffeine per 8 oz while decaffeinated coffee has ___ mg caffeine
per 8 oz.
a. 175,8
b. 150, 5
c. 95,3
d. 90,3

Answer: C. The average cup of coffee has 95 mg of caffeine per cup while decaffeinated cup has 3 mg
caffeine per cup.

11. Which freezing process results in the highest quality frozen product?
a. immersion freezing
b. cryogenic freezing
c. contact freezing
d. individual quick freezing

Answer: D. Individual quick freezing preserves nutrients, flavor, and product integrity.

Food Science 47
© 2022 Veritense™

References

' Brown AC. Understanding Food: Principles and Preparation. 5th ed. Boston, MA: Cengage; 2014.

2 McWilliams M. Foods: Experimental Perspectives. 8th ed. New York City, NY: Pearson; 2016.

3 Carotenoids: Everything You Need to Know. Healthline. https://www.healthline.com/health/carotenoids
Acecssed 13 Feb 2021.

4 Saltveit ME. Is it possible to find an optimal controlled atmosphere? Postharvest Biology and
Technology. 2003. 27:3-13.

5 Thalheimer JC. Gluten-free whole grains. Today's Dietitian. 2014;16(10):18.

http://www.todaysdietitian.com/newarchives/100614p18.shtml. Accessed 11 Feb 2021.
® Adams P. Word of the Week: Retrogradation. Cooks Illustrated. 2017.

https:/Awww.cooksillustrated.com/science/860-articles/story/word-of-the-week-retrogradation Accessed 11
Feb 2021.

7 Pikosky, M. Whey vs. Casein: What makes these proteins different? Undeniably Dairy. 6 July 2016.
https:/Awww.usdairy.com/news-articles/whats-the-difference-between-casein-and-whey Accessed 13 Feb
2021.

8 Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. Food and Drug Administration.
https://(www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=133.3 Accessed 14 Feb
2021.

® Pasteurization. International Dairy Foods Association. https://www.idfa.org/pasteurization Accessed 14
Feb 2021.

'0 Final Determination Regarding Partially Hydrogenated Oils (Removing Trans Fat). Food and Drug

Administration. https://www.fda.gov/food/food-additives-petitions/final-determination-regarding-partially-
hydrogenated-oils-removing-trans-fat Accessed 14 Feb 2021.
"! Types of Food Ingredients. Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/food/food-ingredients-

packaging/overview-food-ingredients-additives-colors#types Accessed 15 Feb 2021

'2 Grades and Standards. Agricultural Marketing Service. US Depatment of Agriculture.

https://www.ams.usda.gov/grades-standards Accessed 13 Feb 2021.
'3 Official US Standards. Federal Grain Inspection Service. US Department of Agriculture.

https://www.gipsa.usda.gov/fgis/usstandards.aspx Accessed 15 Feb 2021.
'4 Official US Standards for Grain. Federal Grain Inspection Service. US Department of Agriculture. 2007.

https://www.gipsa.usda.gov/fgis/standards/general_provisions.pdf Accessed 15 Feb 2021.
'§ Seafood Guidance Documents and Regulatory Information. Food and Drug Administration.
https://Awww.fda.gov/food/quidance-documents-regulatory-information-topic-food-and-dietary-

supplements/seafood-quidance-documents-requlatory-information Accessed 15 Feb 2021.
'6 Colorado State University Extension. Drying Vegetables. Available at:

http://extension.colostate.edu/topic-areas/nutrition-food-safety-health/dryin
11 Feb 2021.

17 Milani JM and Golkar A. Some New Aspects of Colloidal Systems in Foods. DOI:
10.5772/intechopen.85298

'8 Overview of Food Ingredients, Additives, and Colors. Food and Drug Administration.

https :/Awww.fda.gov/food/food-ingredients-packaging/overview-food-ingredients-additives-colors
Accessed 15 Feb 2021.

19 Color Library. International Association of Color Manufacturers. https://iacmcolor.org/color-library/
Accessed 15 Feb 2021.

20 Holderbaum DF, Kon T, Kudo T, Guerra MP. Enzymatic browning, polyphenol oxidase activity, and
polyphenols in four apple cultivars: Dynamics during fruit development. HortScience. 2010. 45 (8):1150-
1154.

-vegetables-9-308/. Accessed

Food Science 48
