NORMAL NUTRITION,
DIGESTION & ABSORPTION

-
cru

FOR THE REGISTERED DIETITIAN NUTRITIONIST EXAMINATION

a VERITENSE™ product

WRITTEN BY
Bailey DeBarmore, PhD MHS RDN LDN
Creator of the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™

Version: Oct 1, 2022
© 2022 Veritense™

Table of Contents

TOIrMS Of USC 0.0... eeeceeccceceeeeeeeenneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeuaaeeeeeeeeeseeeeseaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeseneceaaeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeneeees 3
Principles Of Normal Nutrition ............ccccccccsesseeesseeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeaeeeeeaaeeaeeeaeeeae 4
Nutrient FUNCtiOns. ..0....0.....0 0c. eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeees 4
Carbohydrate «0.22... cece cece cece eeeeceeneceeeeeeeeeeeeeenaaaaaeeeeeeeeeseeeeeenaaaeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeneees 7

ad 00) o) 5 eee 10

Fat. cece cee cece cence ee eeeeeeeeeeeenaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeaaeeeseeeeeeeeeeaaaaeeeseeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaes 14
AICONOL 0.0.0... eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeees 18
Non-Nutritive SUDStANCES ..0.... oe. cece cece eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenaaaeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeaaaaeeeees 19
PhytOChemicalls ..0...........cceeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaeeeeeeeseeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaaes 19

ed cs-) (61 (0 (2) ee ee 21
Non-Nuttritive TOXINS.............ccccccccccecceeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeaeceeeeaaeeeseaesaeseaaaaaees 21
Non-Nutritive SWeetene’s .......... eee ccc ccceeee cece eeeeeeeeeeaaaaeeeeeeeeeeseeennaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaes 22
Dietary SUPPIOMENES ......... cece cc ceceeeseeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeesseeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeaaeeeees 23
Herbals and Botanicals ..............cccccccceeceeccsneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeaes 25
The Gastrointestinal System: Digestion and Absorption ................::ceeeseeseeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeees 35
StrUCture oo... cece c cece cece eceeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaeeeeeeseeeseaaaaaaaeeeeeeeeseeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeaes 35
DiG@StiOn 00... eceeeeccecceeeceeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeees 37
What Happens Where ..w..........ecceeeccccccccc cece eeeeeeeeeneaeeeeeeeeeeeseeeneaaeaeeeeeeeseeeeseeaaaeeeees 38
Gastrointestinal HOrMONeS.............:.cccceccceeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeneaeeeeeeeeeeeseeeseeneaaeeeees 43
ADSOSDPTION 2000... eee 47
Carbohydrate. ..........eececccecceecseceeeenneeeeeeeeenaeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeenaaaeeeseeeeaeeeseseeaaeeeseeeeaaeeeeeeaas 49

ad 00) =) 8 er 50
LiPis. oo... cece cece cece eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeaeaaeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneaaes 50
VITAMINS ooo eee 52
Minerals 0.22... eee ccccceccceceecceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeeeseeaeesseaseesseeseceseeseeaaaaeseaaaaaees 57
Study Guide QUESTIONS 00.0.0... e cece e cece eeeeeeeeneaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeesseeaaaeeeeeeeeeeey 59
Practice QUESTIONS 00.0.0... ceccccceeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeesseeeeeeeaueeaaeeeeeeeseeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeses 60
Practice Questions (ANSWETS) ...........cccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeseeaaaaeeeeeeeeeeey 63
REPEFENCES 22... ec ceeeccceeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneaeeeeeeeeceeeeceeeeeaaeeeeeeeseeeseeeseseeeaeeeeeeeseeeeeeaaaeeeeeeeeesen 66

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 2
© 2022 Veritense™

Terms of use

Bailey DeBarmore is the creator and sole owner of the exclusive copyright to this study
resource.

This publication may not be shared physically or electronically with anyone, manipulated,
copied, reprinted and sold, altered, or reproduced in any form or by any means without
requesting further permission from the owner, Bailey DeBarmore.

This book is for personal use only by a single individual. It should not be distributed to a dietetic
internship class or otherwise used for academic purposes without discussing terms of use with
the owner. By purchasing this item, you agree to the Terms of Use outlined herein.

To inquire about further permissions for this document, including access for groups such as
dietetic internship classes or graduate courses, contact the owner to learn about your options.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 3
© 2022 Veritense™

Principles of Normal Nutrition
Nutrient Functions

In this section, we'll talk through the important concepts for each of the 3 macronutrients.
Specifically, their function, food sources, different forms, and more. At the beginning of each
macronutrient section, there will be a table summarizing some basic information (like the
general function, calories per gram, intake recommendations, food sources, different forms,
digestion and absorption processes, and some additional notes) that should feel like a review
from your dietetic coursework.

As you work through the Nutrient Functions section, add your own notes and create your own
blank table to study afterwards or access free worksheets at
www.studysmartermethod.com/freebies (or provided in your toolkit if purchased as PTEP).

Rather than trying to memorize the information in this section and in the tables, use the
information provided to get a better understanding of the context behind each macronutrient —
why the body needs it, how the body gets it, and how the body uses it. At the end of this section,
you should be able to answer the study guide questions which test those big picture concepts
and require you to link together details, like in the table below, with the why and how. Before we
get started, remind yourself of the terms and definitions listed in Table 1.

Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) are set for both macronutrients and micronutrients, as well as
for water and specific nutrients, like fiber. You can find the DRI tables on the Office of Dietary
Supplement website (www .ods.od.nih.gov). These recommendations are developed and put
forth by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering and Medicine, and are used to guide the Dietary Guidelines.

Table 1. Terms to Know — Dietary Reference Intakes
Dietary Reference Intake — refers to all of the reference values listed below that are used to
DRI guide nutrient intake in healthy people, sorted by factors such as age, sex, pregnancy, and
breastfeeding status

Recommended Dietary Allowance — average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the
nutrient requirements for 97-98% of all healthy people. Vary by sex, age, and
pregnancy/breastfeeding status

Adequate Intake — when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA, the Al is set at a level
assumed to ensure “nutritional adequacy”

UL Tolerable Upper Intake Level — maximum daily intake that is unlikely to cause adverse health

effects

EAR Estimated Average Requirement — nutrient intake level estimated to meet the needs of 50%
of people of a certain age and sex group. Used to determine the RDA.

AMDR Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Range — used to report macronutrient

recommendations, such as 45 — 65% of daily calories from carbohydrates
Source: Institute of Medicine. 2006. Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient
Requirements. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226.11537

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 4
© 2022 Veritense™

As you work through this next section, think ahead to nutrition practice through the life cycle.
How does a macronutrient’s function link to the amount the body needs as it goes through
growth in the life cycle?

Let’s talk a little more about the DRIs. I'll present the information in a few different ways.

Dietary Reference Indices (DRIs)

100% 28D wn
Al

>

oO

s wz
2 50% --—-<-= 50% 2
= @
» x
}- 8
a g

0%

EAR RDA UL
Increasing intake >

Figure 1. Dietary Reference Indices (DRIs).

In Figure 1 above, we have 2 axes. On the left, we have the risk of nutrient inadequacy from 0
to 100%. We use this axis when looking at the EAR and RDA. On the right, we have the risk of
nutrient excess, also from 0 to 100%. We use this axis for the UL. We use both axes for the Al.

Look back at the definitions on the previous page. The EAR is the estimated amount to meet the
needs of 50% of the population. Note the dashed line going from the vertical EAR line to a 50%

risk of inadequacy. The RDA is EAR + 2 standard deviations (SD) which shifts us from covering

50% of the population to nearly 98%.

Remember, around 98% of a normally distributed population is captured when we go 2SD from
the mean. In this case, we only need to go in one direction. The 68-95-99 rule in statistics
reminds you that 68% of a population is captured with 1 SD, 95% with 2 SD, and 99.7% with 3
SD from the mean. However, this is true when we are considering a full bell curve. Because we
are only looking at one side, 2.5% is to the right of the RDA (100 — 2.5 = 97.5%) and thus, the
RDA covers 97 — 98% of the population.

On the other side of Figure 1, we see the UL set where risk of excess is nearly 0%. Note that
UL’s are extremely conservative — we don’t want to risk any issues.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 5
© 2022 Veritense™

When we don’t have enough information to set an EAR, that means we can’t set an RDA.' The
Al is used instead and is a wider range between what might be the EAR and the UL.'

If you’re wondering why the EAR isn’t set at the very peak of the bell curve or why the RDA
doesn’t cover 95% of the population, don’t worry. The EAR isn’t at the peak (like it would be
below in Figure 2) because we are plotting the curve against nutrient intake. You can see that
the EAR is set to cover 50% of the population (left half of the curve). The RDA is set at + 2 SD
of the EAR (not + 2 SD), which adds on 34% + 13.5% of the population. You can think of it on
the flipside; the RDA only leaves out 2.5% of the theoretical population, thus giving you 97.5%
and not 95%.

Distribution of nutrient needs in a healthy sex and age-specific population

50% + 34% + 13.5% = 97.5%

100 — 2.5% = 97.5%

EAR RDA
+#1SD +2SD

Figure 2. Distribution of nutrient needs in a healthy sex and age-specific population.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 6
© 2022 Veritense™

Carbohydrate

Section References (where not otherwise specified)
e Gropper SS, Smith JL, and Groff JL. Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism. 2009. Boston,
Massachusetts: Cengage Learning. 5" ed. Print.
e Mahan LK, Escott-Stump S. and Raymond JL. Krause’s Food and the Nutrition Care Process. 2012.
Philadelphia, Pa.; Edinburgh: Elsevier Saunders. 13" ed. Print.

The function carbohydrates play in our diet is key — they are the main source of energy that we
count on and provide 4 calories per gram. Carbohydrates also play an important role in cellular
communication (i.e. in forming glycoproteins). In plants, carbohydrates (such as cellulose) are
an important structural material. Much of what you learned in advanced nutrition science
courses was about glucose metabolism, including glycolysis, the Krebs’s cycle, oxidative
phosphorylation, gluconeogenesis, and hormonal regulation of blood glucose levels.

Table 2. Carbohydrates — Summary Table

Carbohydrates

Function Major source of energy
Calories/gram 4 cal/g

45 — 65% cal/day [AMDR for adults]
DRI Fiber: 14 g per 1,000 kcal [DGA] or 25+ gram/day for adults [Al]
Added sugar: <10% cal/day [DGA]
Whole grains, legumes, starchy vegetables (peas, beans, lentils, potatoes,
yams), dairy, fruits
Monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, galactose)
Different Forms Disaccharides* (maltose, sucrose, lactose)
Polysaccharides** (amylose, glycogen, amylopectin, cellulose)
Poly — di — mono
by amylase, maltase, sucrase, lactase
Absorbed as Monosaccharides

Food Sources

Digested into...by...*

e The brain prefers to use glucose for energy and can convert amino
acids or glycerol to glucose for energy
The body stores glucose as glycogen in the liver and skeletal muscle;
glycogen in the muscle can’t be used to provide glucose for the rest of
the body (lacks G6P enzyme)

*Carbohydrates are digested from [form] into [form] by [enzyme]

|Disaccharide | _—__—s'| Monosaccharides | Enzyme __i|
|Maltose ————s| © __| Glucose + Glucose |Maltase |
| Sucrose ———s| _| Fructose + Glucose

Lactose '> | Glucose + Galactose Lactase

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 7
© 2022 Veritense™

Structure

Carbohydrates include monosaccharides, disaccharides, and polysaccharides.
Monosaccharides include glucose, fructose, and galactose. While these 3 are the main
monosaccharides we consider in dietary nutrition, there are other monosaccharides as well,
including mannose, glyceraldehyde, dihydroxyacetone (a ketose), and ribose and its derivative
deoxyribose, which are key in the structure of RNA and DNA.

In Figure 3 below, can you spot the difference between glucose and galactose? Does fructose
have the same number of carbons as glucose?

CH20H CH2OH OH CH20OH
fe) O OH}—o, OH
OH HO OH
On OH CH20H
OH OH OH
Glucose Fructose Galactose

Figure 3. Three monosaccharides: glucose, fructose, and galactose

Disaccharides include sucrose (fructose and glucose), maltose (glucose and glucose), and
lactose (glucose and galactose). They are formed via dehydration reactions between 2 carbons
on each monosaccharide. These glycosidic bonds are what digestive enzymes break. For
example, sucrase breaks down the a 1-2 linkage between glucose and fructose, maltase breaks
down the a 1-4 linkage between 2 glucose monomers, and lactase breaks the B 1-4 linkage
between glucose and galactose.

In Figure 4 below, can you match the monomers above to the disaccharides?

CH2OH
CH2OH
' oH HOH y CH2OH CH2OH 0 OH
OH H ie) O 0, CH2OH K OH
H HO OH OH oH} —o O
OH e) CH2OH y
OH OH OH OH
— OH H OH OH
OH
Sucrose Maltose Lactose

Figure 4. Three disaccharides: sucrose, maltose, and lactose.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 8
© 2022 Veritense™

Polysaccharides include starch (i.e. amylose and amylopectin), glycogen, and various fibers.
They are made up of long chains of glucose with different shapes, depending on the type and
number of glycosidic bonds. The different shapes of polysaccharides determine their properties,
including whether humans can digest them or not. Polysaccharides are important, both as foods
we eat and as energy we store. Cellulose (a fiber) and starch are from plant sources.

Glycogen and amylopectin are highly branched (via a 1-6 bonds), rather than a single long line
of glucose (like amylose via a 1-4 bonds). The main chains of glucose in glycogen and
amylopectin are joined via a 1-4 bonds and branches form at the a 1-6 locations. Branching has
an advantage because enzymes can work on the free end of the strand, either to release
glucose for energy or to add glucose on. Glycogen has branching about every 10 monomers,
while amylopectin has branching about every 20 monomers. Due to this, glycogen is much more
branched than amylopectin.

While glycogen and starch use a glycosidic links, cellulose is made up of glucose units

OH OH OH OH
HO + O90. HO 4 00~ HO 90~ HO OOH
HH H “HH oH AHH OH ™™<HH OH
Nei H Ve Ve 1 Ne 1
OH OH OH HO OH OH OH OH
OH OH OH OH
HO 00. HO Oo. HO Oo~ HO OOH
HH H “HH HTD) MHH H HH H
Ne 1 Vel 14 ss eel 14
OH OH OH OH OH OH OH OH
Cellulose

CH,OH
Lo

JOH  <OH KOH
INS IN YIN
OH OH OH

Amylose Amylopectin and Glycogen

Figure 5. Four polysaccharides: cellulose, amylose, amylopectin, and glycogen.

linked with B glycosidic bonds which require every other glucose monomer to flip and allows the
formation of hydrogen cross links between parallel strands providing strength. This difference in
glycosidic bonds is the reason why humans cannot digest cellulose. Amylase, which breaks
down starch and glycogen into glucose units, works on a glycosidic bonds, not B glycosidic
bonds. Lactase can break B glycosidic bonds but only between glucose and galactose, not 2
glucose molecules. There is some thought that gut microbiota can use cellulase, an enzyme, to
break down the chains of glucose in cellulose. The bacteria then use the glucose for their own
health (that is, we do not absorb the glucose). Cellulose is insoluble in water. Thus, cellulose is
commonly referred to as insoluble fiber.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 9
© 2022 Veritense™

Protein

Section References (where not otherwise specified)
e Gropper SS, Smith JL, and Groff JL. Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism. 2009. Boston,
Massachusetts: Cengage Learning. 5" ed. Print.
e Mahan LK, Escott-Stump S. and Raymond JL. Krause’s Food and the Nutrition Care Process. 2012.
Philadelphia, Pa.; Edinburgh: Elsevier Saunders. 13" ed. Print.

Dietary protein is our body’s source of amino acids which are used to build enzymes, provide
structural support (i.e. collagen, elastin, keratin), transporters (i.e. albumin, ferritin, hemoglobin,
lipoproteins), peptide hormones (i.e. insulin, glucagon, growth hormone), receptors (i.e. GLUT
1), muscle contraction (i.e. actin, myosin), repair and grow tissue (i.e. skeletal muscle), and
maintain immune function (i.e. antibodies and immunoglobulins). Many of the biomarkers we
use in nutrition are actually proteins, like hemoglobin, ferritin, and albumin. Additionally, proteins
make up the molecules responsible for regulating gene expression.

Table 3. Protein— Summary Table

Protein

Regulate gene expression, build muscle tissue, hormones,
Function enzymes, transporters, immune factors, hair/skin/nails, fluid
balance
Calories/gram 4 cal/g

DRI 10 — 35% cal/day (adults) [AMDR]

Animal protein (meat, poultry, fish, dairy, eggs, etc.)
Plant sources (beans, nuts, seeds, soy, quinoa, lentils, tofu, etc.)

e Essential amino acids — threonine, valine, tryptophan,

Food Sources

Different Forms isoleucine, leucine, lysine, phenylalanine, methionine, histidine
e Conditionally essential amino acids- argini glutamine, etc.
Protein — polypeptides by pepsin and gastric acid

Polypeptides — free amino acids and oligopeptides by pancreatic
enzymes

Oligopeptides — free amino acids via brush border enzymes

Digested into...by...

Absorbed as Free amino acid (40%) and oligopeptides (60%)

Notes Most amino acids are glucogenic meaning they can be converted
into glucose via gluconeogenesis

The building blocks of protein are amino acids. The majority are essential, meaning that we
must consume them from our diet because we cannot make them ourselves. Others are
conditionally essential, which means in certain physiological states (infant prematurity, PKU,
severe catabolic disease, etc.) they become essential as our body can no longer produce or
consume enough or any of these amino acids on our own. If we have enough complete protein
in our diet, we can synthesize the non-essential amino acids.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 10
© 2022 Veritense™

How will you remember the essential, non-essential, and conditionally essential amino acids?

Table 4. Amino Acids — Essential and Non-Essential

Isoleucine Threonine Alanine *Arginine *Glycine
Leucine Tryptophan Aspartate “Asparagine *Proline

Methionine Valine Cysteine *Glutamine *Serine
Phenylalanine Lysine Glutamate *Tyrosine
Histidine

“Conditionally essential

When someone adopts a vegetarian diet, they need to use protein complementation because
many plant sources are incomplete proteins. Protein complementation is when you combine
two different plant proteins to make sure you consume all 9 essential amino acids. There are
particular amino acids that are low in plant foods and these are called “limiting amino acids’.
They are often the focus of protein complementation. Note that complementary protein sources
don’t need to be eaten in the same meal. Often, eating a varied vegetarian diet throughout the
day is sufficient to consume all 9 essential amino acids. Note that protein complementation can
be achieved by consuming a diverse diet.

Protein complementation, or protein pairing, is common in many cultures.” Asian culture often
pairs rice and soy. Latin American culture often pairs beans and corn. Succotash (corn, beans,
and other vegetables) was popularized during the Great Depression and is also an example of
protein pairing.

Table 5 below lists the type of plant protein and its limiting amino acid, meaning that the amino
acid is low in that food source and thus, we need to complement it with another plant source
that has that amino acid. For example, we would pair legumes, which are low in methionine,
with any of the other sources that aren’t low in methionine.

Which food would you not pair legumes with to achieve a complete protein?

Table 5. Protein Complementation Examples

food —____ Limiting Amine Acid _ Limiting Amino Acid Complementary Food
| Beans (legumes)

Nuts, seeds L sine Legumes
Grains L sine, threonine Legumes

Source: American Society for Nutrition®

Some plant proteins are actually complete proteins, including buckwheat, quinoa, hemp seed,
chia seed, soy, and spirulina. Some animal protein sources, including gelatin, are incomplete
proteins.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 11
© 2022 Veritense™

Structure

Amino acids have a backbone that includes an amino group and a carboxyl group. The amino
group is what makes protein our source of nitrogen. Each amino acid has a unique R group, or
specialty group, that gives it certain properties, such as size, polarity, and acid or base
properties. In Figure 6 below, you can see that the R group in tyrosine includes an aromatic ring
which gives it nonpolar properties and that aromatic ring is actually a phenol, meaning it has a
hydroxyl group which makes it acidic. You may see amino acid forms written with or without the
extra hydrogens on the amino group or carboxyl groups. Depending on the hydrogen status, the
amino acid may have a slightly different name, such as aspartate versus aspartic acid, or
glutamate versus glutamic acid.

! O carboxy | Tyrosine ro a
' ' al
! I Group : | Grow
CH, 3

cH Non \n78 on

| Woonona / | HO |
NH len en enna nen nee ee ee en en en ee en en ene NH,
Aromatic (ring) and ;
2 hydroxyl (phenol) ae a
Amino Group Non polar and acidic

Figure 6. Amino acid structure, general (left) and example amino acid (right, tyrosine).

Proteins can have up to 4 layers of structure. Primary structure is the sequence of amino acids
and uses peptide bonds and disulfide bonds. Secondary structure begins spatial structure with
hydrogen bonds forming a helix or B pleated sheets. Tertiary structure uses disulfide bonds, salt
bridges, hydrogen bonds, and non-polar hydrophobic reactions for more three-dimensional
shape. Quaternary structure is the arrangement of multiple subunits using hydrogen bonds,
ionic interactions, and hydrophobic interactions.

Why does protein structure matter? Protein structure is key to protein function, whether as a
peptide hormone that needs to fit a receptor, as an enzyme with a specific configuration to be
active or inactive, or for digestibility. Genetic disorders resulting in incorrect amino acid
sequences can render a protein nonfunctional. Examples include sickle cell anemia and cystic
fibrosis.

Keep protein structure in mind when we talk about enzymes later.

Various things can denature (disrupt the structure) of a protein. Cooking food in heat denatures
proteins which makes them more digestible. For example, frying an egg results in denaturing
the proteins, leading to coagulation and a change in appearance. Precipitation is another cause
of denaturation. Acids, like gastric acid, bases, detergents, and heavy metals can denature
proteins via precipitation.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 12
© 2022 Veritense™

Simple proteins contain only amino acids, so when they are hydrolyzed, they yield only amino
acids. Examples include albumin, globulin, and glutelin. Conjugate proteins include both amino
acids and other compounds, either organic or inorganic. Examples include lipoproteins like low
density lipoprotein (LDL), glycoproteins like immunoglobulin G, phosphoproteins like casein,
hemoproteins like hemoglobin, metalloproteins like ferritin, and nucleoproteins like ribosomes.

Proteins aren’t stored as energy reserves like carbohydrate (i.e. glycogen) and lipids (i.e.
adipose tissue). The liver maintains an amino acid pool which makes up less than 1% of our
total body protein with amino acids moving in and out of the pool constantly. It’s estimated that
our bodies break down about 250 g protein each day and build 250 g of new protein each day. If
we don't have a sufficient amino acid pool (due to low protein intake, for example) our body will
find amino acids elsewhere, including skeletal muscle. When the body uses amino acids for
various processes, nitrogen is removed and converted in the liver to urea because nitrogen is
toxic. Urea is a safe and highly water-soluble way for the body to excrete nitrogen.

While proteins primary function isn’t to provide energy, they can still do so in times of need
when the body begins to break down skeletal muscle as a source of energy. Some amino acids
can be converted directly to glucose to be used by the brain. Several can be converted to either
glucose or ketone bodies (aka glucogenic or ketogenic amino acids), depending on what the
body needs, while 2 can only be converted to ketone bodies (aka ketogenic amino acids). See
Table 6 for a list.

Table 6. Amino Acids According to Glucogenic and Ketogenic Forms

Alanine Glutamine Leucine Phenylalanine
Arginine Glycine Lysine Isoleucine
Asparagine Histidine Threonine

Aspartate Methionine Tryptophan
Cysteine Proline Tyrosine
Glutamate Serine

Valine

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 13
© 2022 Veritense™

Fat

Section References (where not otherwise specified)
e Gropper SS, Smith JL, and Groff JL. Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism. 2009. Boston,
Massachusetts: Cengage Learning. 5" ed. Print.
e Mahan LK, Escott-Stump S. and Raymond JL. Krause’s Food and the Nutrition Care Process. 2012.
Philadelphia, Pa.; Edinburgh: Elsevier Saunders. 13" ed. Print.

Fats, also called lipids, are a dense source of energy (9 calories per gram), serve as storage for
excess energy that we consume, help make up our cell membranes, and are required to
transport fat soluble vitamins. Steroids, a type of lipid, are used to make cholesterol and the
steroid hormones (i.e. estrogen, testosterone, cortisol, aldosterone, progesterone) while fatty
acids are used for creating hormones called eicosanoids (i.e. prostaglandins).

Table 7. Fat— Summary Table

Fat

Dense source of energy, energy storage, component of cell membranes,
hormone production, and required for fat-soluble vitamin absorption
Calories/g 9 cal/g
AMDR: 20 — 35% cal/day (adults) [AMDR]
Saturated fat: <10% cal/day [DGA]
Linoleic acid: 12 — 17 g/day (female, male adults) [Al]
Linolenic acid: 1.1 — 1.6 female, male adults) [A
Plant oils, animal fat, fatty foods (fish, nuts, etc.)
Monounsaturated (olive oil, canola oil, avocado, nuts)
Polyunsaturated (corn, soybean, safflower oil; fatty fish)
Saturated fat (coconut oil, animal fat)
Omega-3* fatty acids (a-linolenic) in walnuts, flaxseed, canola oil, fish
oil, etc.
Omega-6* fatty acids (linoleic) in safflower oil, corn oil, etc.
Trans fats (artificial trans fats previously found in margarine,
shortening, and some fried foods, now illegal)
o Artificial trans fats are formed when liquid fats are turned into
solid fats, using a process called hydrogenation.
o Hydrogenation increases food shelf life and artificial trans
fats became more common in the food supply as a
replacement for saturated fat*

Function

Food Sources

Triglycerides — found in food, consist of 1 glycerol and 3 fatty
acids
Different Forms Fatty acids — can be saturated or unsaturated
Sterols
Phospholipids — phosphate attached to 2 fatty acids

Triglycerides — diglycerides — free fatty acids (FFA) and monoglycerides
via lipase

Digested into...by...

Absorbed as FFA and monoglycerides in micelles

About 10% of triglycerides will be converted to glucose by using the
glycerol backbone in gluconeogenesis

“Omega fatty acids are named by counting the first double bond from the methyl end (the methyl end is the
omega end). So, an omega-3 fatty acid has the first double bond 3 carbons in from the methyl end, while an
omega-6 fatty acid has the first double bond 6 carbons in from the methyl end, giving the fatty acids
different shapes. See Figure 9 for examples.

Notes

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 14
© 2022 Veritense™

Structure
Triglycerides are the predominant Triglyceride
form of lipids that we consume.
Triglycerides are composed of a Hog Ht , HY H 1 H | H
glycerol backbone and 3 fatty acids. H—c—-07 oN 4 sentence o e4 sen"
When we think about unsaturated a ee ee i
and saturated fats, we're talking o 4 Pe pata Pow Tow Taw Dw
about fatty acids. The 3 fatty acids H-c-o-°Ng-° SE-EN GONG eong-E SE-ENG ONG -
in a triglyceride do not need to be VU a ee ee
the same fatty acid and do not need o WP H a Tw Tow Tow fa
to all be saturated or all H-c-07 ON Gnd - Eng CNG “ ~e-¢ Se-Cng oH
unsaturated. M Vo a ee ee

Glycerol 3 saturated fatty acids
Fatty acids are composed of Figure 7. Structure of a triglyceride (triacylglycerol)
carbon and hydrogen. They can
have single bonds (saturated) or

n rated fatty acid
double bonds (unsaturated). Saturated Unsaturate tty ac
means that every carbon has its own Hon same side
hydrogen, and these fatty acids are cis-fatty acid
structurally straight and can fit tightly 9 4 4 4 4 4 4
together. Monounsaturated fatty acids HOO 6-9 Cane! 4
have one double bond while H HHH ¥-4 if
polyunsaturated fatty acids have more oe
than one double bond). % KY
% Kf

Major dietary saturated fatty acids + \Yy
include myristic acid, palmitic acid, trans-fatty acid
mrearic acid, erie a mn ° H H H H H os ar
ignoceric acid. yristic acid is e Ho-c-¢-¢—¢-e-¢y TL Tt
saturated fat responsible for the high iit F-¢-C—C—C—C-H
saturated fat content of palm oil and HHHH yw 8 te ts te k
coconut oil, and is found in most
animal and plant fats. Palmitic acid is H on opposite sides

found in most animal and plant fats.
Stearic acid is found in animal fats and
in some plant fats. Arachidic acid is the saturated fat responsible for the high saturated fat
content (relative to other plant fats) of peanut oil. Lignoceric acid is found in most natural fats
and in small amounts in peanut oil.

Figure 8. Structure of unsaturated fatty acids.

Unsaturated means at least one of the carbons has a double bond to another carbon and that
extra bond replaces one of the hydrogens. Double bonds can be cis or trans. Cis double bonds
have hydrogens on the same side of the joined carbons and result in a bent shape. Trans
double bonds are hydrogens on opposite sides of the joined carbons, resulting in a straight

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 15
© 2022 Veritense™

shape. When we talk about trans fatty acids, those are actually unsaturated fats but they are
unsaturated with trans bonds which make them straight, and they can fit together and act like a
saturated fat.

When we talk about unsaturated fats, we are referring to cis-fatty acids. Their bent shape
means the fatty acids cannot fit together tightly, resulting in a fat that is liquid at room
temperature. In contrast, saturated fats are tightly packed at room temperature. Think about
canola oil (7% saturated) versus butter (68% saturated) versus coconut oil (91% saturated).

Table 8 organizes some of the dietary fatty acids listed in Table 9 into lists that you can use to
remember which fat sources are lowest or highest in saturated fats, or in linoleic acid or linolenic
acid (more on the last 2 in the omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acid section).

Table 8. Fats and Oils Organized by Fatty Acid Composition

Lowest in Saturated Highest in Saturated Highest in Linoleic Highest in a-Linolenic
Fat Fat Acid (Omega-6 Omega-3

Canola oil Coconut oil Safflower oil Canola oil
Safflower Oil Butter Sunflower oil Soybean oil
Sunflower Oil Palm oil Corn oil

Corn oil Beef tallow Soybean oil
Olive oil Lard Cottonseed oil
Soybean oil Cottonseed oil
Peanut oil

Table 9. Comparison of fatty acid composition among common dietary fats

Unsaturated
Dietary Fat Saturated Polyunsaturated
7%

Monounsaturated | Linoleic Acid | a-Linolenic
(Omega-6) (Omega-3)
Canola 61% 21% 11%

Sunflower 12% 16% 71%
Corn 138% 29% 57%

Olive 15% 75% 9%
“Buiter 43% 47% ae

Bate tallow

Safflower

Cottonseed

Peanut oil 19% 48% 33%

Coconut

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 16
© 2022 Veritense™

Other types of lipids (other than triglycerides and fatty acids) are phospholipids and sterols.
Phospholipids are key components of our cell membranes and are made up of two fatty acids
and a phosphate group.

In contrast, triglycerides are fatty acids connected to a glycerol. You
can also have diglycerides which are 2 fatty acids connected to a
glycerol.

Phospholipid structure makes them both hydrophilic and
hydrophobic, and perfect for double cell membranes. The
hydrophobic fatty acids cluster together and the phosphate heads
face into and out of the cell. Phospholipids are also used as single
membranes in HDL, LDL, and micelles, with the hydrophilic
phosphate head facing outwards, and the hydrophobic ends facing

inside where the lipids are stored. .
Micelle

Omega-3 and Omega-6 Fatty Acids

Omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids have a particular focus in nutrition. They are named as such
by counting the location of the first double bond, starting at the methyl (CHs) end of the fatty
acid. Omega-3 fatty acids have the first double bond at the 3 carbon from the methyl (omega)
end, and omega-6 fatty acids have the first double bond at the 6" carbon from the methyl end.
The omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acid types differ from one another in their total number of
carbons and double bonds.

Omega-3 fatty acids Omega-6 fatty acids
Ce SS" 100 RAN OOOO COOH
ALA: a-Linolenic acid C18:3 n-3 LA: Linoleic acid C182 n-6
oy ~ ea
Hm, COOH
EPA: Eicos: tanoic acid C20:5 r-3 AA: Arachidonic acid C20:4 n-6
HAS. _COOH
ON eee eee eee eee ee Yt

CH,

.
s DHA: Docosahexanoic acid 22-6 n-3 OPA: Docosapentanoic acid C22:5n-6

Methyl group

\ Methyl group (omega end)

(omega end)

Figure 9. Examples of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. DPA can be metabolized to an omega-3 metabolite.
Omega-3 fatty acids include a-linolenic acid (ALA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). ALA is found in linseed oil, soybean oil, canola oil, flaxseed, and
walnuts. EPA is found in marine algae, fish oils, and shellfish while DHA is found in animal fat

sources, fish oils, and shellfish. Because omega-3 fatty acids are key in vision development and
brain development, women are often told to supplement with omega-3 during pregnancy.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 17
© 2022 Veritense™

Omega-6 fatty acids include linoleic acid (LA) and arachidonic acid (AA). Linoleic acid is found
in corn oil, safflower oil, soybean oil, cottonseed oil, sunflower seed oil, and peanut oil.
Arachidonic acid is found in small amounts in meat and eggs. We often recommend for people
to reduce saturated fat to less than 10% of their fat intake and health results of doing so depend
on what we replace the saturated fat with. If we replace saturated fat in the diet with linoleic
acid, we can lower total cholesterol. However, HDL, or the “good cholesterol”, will also
decrease. A patient on parenteral nutrition who is not getting sufficient lipid infusions may
manifest with omega-6 fatty acid deficiency. Signs and symptoms include eczema, poor growth
rate (in the young) and petechiae. Which omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids are only found in
plant sources? Animal sources?

Alcohol

Section References (where not otherwise specified)
e Gropper SS, Smith JL, and Groff JL. Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism. 2009. Boston,
Massachusetts: Cengage Learning. 5" ed. Print.
e Mahan LK, Escott-Stump S. and Raymond JL. Krause’s Food and the Nutrition Care Process. 2012.
Philadelphia, Pa.; Edinburgh: Elsevier Saunders. 13" ed. Print.

Alcohol is sometimes called the “non-nutritive nutrient” because it provides calories without
nutrients, and those calories are processed differently than the energy from carbohydrates,
proteins, and lipids. When discussing alcohol, we are talking about ethyl alcohol specifically.
Chemically, alcohol is a certain type of functional group. Ethyl alcohol, or ethanol, is what makes
up the alcoholic content of liquor, wine, and beer.

Alcohol is absorbed in the stomach and small intestine with 7 cal/g. However, these calories are
considered “empty” calories and overconsumption of alcohol often replaces consumption of
nutritive substances, leading to primary malnutrition. Functional damage to the Gl tract and the
liver, which processes alcohol, can lead to maldigestion and malabsorption that furthers
malnutrition (known as secondary malnutrition), which in turn furthers functional impairment. In
the liver, excessive alcohol metabolism impairs the livers ability to process and use other
nutrients, leading to liver disease.

Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome can be seen in alcoholics and is due to thiamin deficiency. Go
online and research Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. What role does alcohol play in thiamin
deficiency? What are the symptoms and how is it treated? What other negative effects does
alcoholism have on the body’s nutrition status?

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 18
© 2022 Veritense™

Non-Nutritive Substances

Non-nutritive substances do not provide any energy via calories and do not play a major role in
other bodily functions. They may be beneficial to the body, such as that from phytochemicals,
harmful to the body, such as that from carcinogens, or neutral to the body, such as that from
non-nutritive sweeteners.

Phytochemicals

Suggested Reading

e Phytochemicals. Linus Pauling Institute Micronutrient Information Center. Oregon State

University. https:/Api.oregonstate.edu/mic/dietary-factors/phytochemicals

Phytochemicals provide many fruits and vegetables with their healthy properties and bright
colors. Some are also thought to be protective against chronic disease, including cancer and
heart disease, and are sold in concentrated forms as herbal or botanical supplements.
Phytochemical classes included flavonoids, carotenoids, terpenes, organosulphides, phenolic
acids, lignans, saponins, phytosterols, glucosinolates, and isothiocyanates.°®

For the exam, you should be aware of what phytochemicals are, know that there are different
classes, and the major dietary sources of common phytochemicals (such as lycopene and
tomatoes, B carotene and carrots, glucosinolates and isothiocyanates and cruciferous
vegetables, flavanols and tea). It’s more important to know what phytochemical subclass is
found in what dietary sources than the specific phytochemical name, however, you will
recognize some specific names, like B carotene, so they are provided. The details provided in
this section are to provide context for you to learn and remember the information.

Catechins, epicatechins

Quercetin, kaempferol, myricetin

Onions, tea, olives, kale, leafy
lettuce, cranberry, tomato, apple,
turnip greens, endive, ginkgo
biloba

4

Green tea, pear, wine, apples

Tangeritin, naringenin, hesperitin,

hesperidin
Citrus fruits

Anthocyanidins

— — Berries, cherries, plums, red wine
Genistein, daidzein, equol

Legumes, nuts, milk, cheese, KEY: =
flour, tofu, miso, soy sauce | Daetary sources

Figure 10. Flavonoid phytochemicals, subclasses, and their dietary sources

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 19
© 2022 Veritense™

Flavonoids are the most common class of phytochemicals and give the pigmentation to produce
(i.e. a red apple, purple grapes).® Sources include berries, apples, citrus, cocoa, soy, cruciferous
vegetables, beans, tea, and red wine. Carotenoids are the other class of phytochemicals that
provide color and include B carotene, a carotene, lutein, and lycopene. Flavonoids and
carotenoids are also antioxidants.

Secoisolariciresinol, mataresinol Campesterol, B-sitosterol, stigmasterol

Berries, flaxseed, flaxseed oil, nuts, Vegetable oils (soy, canola, corn,
rye bran sunflower)
Allylisothiocyanates, indoles, Glucobrassicin, gluconapin, sinigrin
sulforaphane glucoiberin

Cruciferous vegetables (broccoli, Cruciferous vegetables (broccoli,
cabbage, Brussels sprouts, mustard, cabbage, Brussels sprouts, mustard,
watercress) watercress)

Hydroxycinnamic acids Hydroxybenzoic acids

Caffeic, ferulic, chlorogenic, neochlorogenic, Ellagic, gallic
curcumin

Blueberries, cherry, pear, apple, orange, grapefruit, Raspberry, strawberry,

white potato, coffee bean, St. John’s wort, echinacea grape juice

Diallyl sulphide, allyl methyl sulphide, Lutein, lycopene, B-carotene, a-
S-allylcysteine carotene
Garlic, onion, leeks, cruciferous Tomato, pumpkin, squash, carrot,
vegetables watermelon, papaya, guava

Citrus, cherries, ginkgo biloba Alfafa sprouts, potato, tomato, ginseng

See separate figure Phytochemicals
See separate figure

Figure 11. Phytochemical classes, phytochemicals, and dietary sources.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 20
© 2022 Veritense™

Antioxidants are a functional class of molecules and include flavonoids and carotenoids, as well as
vitamin C, vitamin E, selenium, manganese, glutathione, coenzyme Q10, lipoic acid, phenols,
phytoestrogens, and polyphenols. Antioxidants “give” electrons to free radicals, which neutralizes their
negative effects (including blood vessel damage) and have roles in DNA repair which has led to
hypotheses of antioxidants preventing some cancers. Excess glucose in the blood stream can lead to
free radical formation, particularly advanced glycation end-products (AGEs), which is likely one
mechanism in which uncontrolled diabetes leads to kidney damage, heart disease, and neuropathy.
Most research on antioxidant supplementation has fallen flat with some harmful effects discovered,
such as vitamin E supplementation in smokers. Companies must follow FDA labeling claim rules when
advertising antioxidant content in their products. When patients are diagnosed with cancer, many
friends and family recommend they start consuming large amounts of foods naturally high in
antioxidants or take supplements. However, while antioxidants may be beneficial for cancer prevention,
once cancer is present and treatment begins, antioxidants can affect how well cancer treatment works.

Suggested Readings
e Collins, K. “What's the difference between antioxidants and phytochemicals?” American
Institute for Cancer Research. https://www.aicr.org/resources/blog/healthtalk-whats-the-
difference-between-an-antioxidant-and-a-phytochemical/
Bramlet, K. Phytochemicals and cancer: What you should know. University of Texas: MD
Anderson Cancer Center. hitps://www.mdanderson.org/publications/focused-on-
health/phytochemicals-and-cancer-what-you-should-know.h10-1591413.html

Pesticides

Pesticide residue on produce is considered a non-nutritive toxin.

Generally, conventional growing methods use synthetic

pesticides and organic growing methods use non-synthetic

pesticides. Both can leave pesticide residues that must be . jh.
washed off prior to consumption. Different types of produce may OF 7 : *

have higher concentrations of pesticide residue, and the
implications for consumption also depend on the part of the
produce eaten.’ When we eat the skin on certain produce, we
also ingest whatever is on the skin, such as pesticides, while those we discard the skin do not
have the same issues with pesticide residue. For example, washing grapes (high surface area)
and apples (where we consume the skin) is going to result in different load ingestion than for
bananas and oranges, which are peeled prior to eating. Regardless of the type of produce
consumed, the amount of pesticides used is regulated to ensure that even in those produce we
eat the skin of, the risk for toxicity is low.

Non-Nutritive Toxins
Recommended Readings

e Dolan LC, Matulka RA, Burdock GA. Naturally occurring food toxins. Toxins (Basel).
2010;2(9):2289-2332. doi:10.3390/toxins2092289 PMCID: PMC3153292

e Natural toxins in food. World Health Organization. 2018. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/natural-toxins-in-food

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 21
© 2022 Veritense™

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) are the carcinogenic compounds that
form when meat is cooked at high temperatures and/or char forms and is
ingested.® Nutrition recommendations include removing charred portions of meat
prior to consumption or not cooking meat over an open flame.

Aflatoxins are created by fungi that live on corn and peanuts. They can be found
in the food supply when crops are harvested. Aflatoxins can also be
concentrated in livestock that consume the infested plants. Large amounts of
aflatoxins can lead to acute toxin poisoning, while smaller amounts, like those
found in the food supply, can lead to liver cancer, liver failure,
immunosuppression, and growth failure in children.°

Diets in developing countries are grain-dependent. How grain is harvested and
stored is key in preventing aflatoxin infestation (molding). Do you think the
harmful effects of aflatoxin may have a disproportionate effect on developing
countries compared to developed countries? Why?

Hydrazines are formed from toxins found in certain mushrooms (i.e. button
mushrooms, portobello mushrooms, cremini mushrooms) and are destroyed upon
cooking.'? Some mushrooms are considered poisonous due to high concentrations
of compounds that are converted into hydrazines in the body. For example, the Gyomitra
mushroom contains gyromitrin which is converted to monomethylhydrazine in the body and
interferes with the nervous system and liver. Even in small amounts, monomethylhydrazine is
considered carcinogenic.

Lectins are glycoproteins found in legumes and grains. Lectins are also called hemagglutinins
and are often used in blood typing, however their ability to agglutinate red blood cells is also
what makes them so dangerous. Lectins have effects throughout the body, in addition to red
blood cell agglutination. They can bind to GI mucosal cells, inhibiting nutrient absorption, and
facilitate bacterial overgrowth in the intestines.'' Kidney beans, green beans, and fava beans
contain a significant quantity of phytohemagglutinin which can lead to acute toxicity within 3
hours after consuming. The FDA recommends cooking legumes in moist heat (steaming or
boiling) to reduce the concentration of lectins, like phytohemagglutinin.

Non-Nutritive Sweeteners

Non-nutritive sweeteners are used in place of sugar or other sweetener ingredients because
they have either very low or no calories. They are also called high-intensity sweeteners, artificial
sweeteners, and sugar substitutes. Non-nutritive sweeteners are sweeter than naturally
occurring sugar and can be used in very small amounts to achieve a similar level of sweetness.
Non-nutritive sweeteners are governed by the FDA under Generally Recognized as Safe
(GRAS) guidelines.

Instead of reproducing a large table here with a list of “high-intensity sweeteners” (FDA’s
preferred terminology), and the information you should know about each one check the FDA
website for the most up-to-date information.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 22
© 2022 Veritense™

e High-Intensity Sweeteners. Food Ingredients & Packaging. The Food and Drug
Administration. 2017 December 19. https://www.fda.gov/food/food-additives-
petitions/additional-information-about-high-intensity-sweeteners-permitted-use-food-
united-states

e Additional Information about High-Intensity Sweeteners Permitted for Use in Foods in
the US. 2018 February 8. https://www.fda.gov/food/food-additives-petitions/additional-

information-about-high-intensity-sweeteners-permitted-use-food-united-states [includes
table of sweeteners]

Go online to the Evidence Analysis Library of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics and read
the Position Statement on the Use of Nutritive and Nonnutritive sweeteners
(https://www.andeal.org/vault/2440/web/JADA_NNS.paf). How many non-nutritive sweeteners
are approved for use in the US? Are there any implications for consumption of these
ingredients, such as for people with PKU?

Dietary Supplements

The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 defines dietary supplements as
products that: '2

e are intended to supplement the diet

e contain 2 1 dietary ingredient or their constituents

e are intended to be taken by mouth (pill, capsule, tablet, liquid)
e are labeled on the front panel as being a dietary supplement

Note that dietary ingredients include vitamins, minerals, herbs and other botanicals, and amino
acids, among others.

Quality

Standardization is a process that ensures consistency between product batches and is often
achieved by measuring levels of the active ingredient (or its markers). Since there are no legal
or regulatory parameters for standardization of dietary supplements in the United States, your
role as a dietitian in helping consumers understand the risks of consuming dietary supplements
is important. While there is no law for standardization of dietary supplements, there are the 2007
Good Manufacturing Practices for dietary supplements issued by the FDA that put forth
expectations to ensure product quality. Specifically, the expectations state to guarantee the
“identity, purity, strength, and composition of their dietary supplements”. There are independent
organizations that offer quality testing and a seal to go along with it, such as the NSF and USP
verifications, but a product having an “NSF” or “USP” seal does not guarantee the product is
free of pesticides, contains what it says it does, or in the amount that it claims.

Labeling

There are rules regarding what manufacturers can put on their product labels, including health-
related claims and descriptions of health impacts. The Federal Trade Commission and the FDA
monitor the marketplace for truth in advertisement. For health-related claims, they have an

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 23
© 2022 Veritense™

asterisk at the end of the claim with the required statement of, “This statement has not been
evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration. This product is not intended to diagnose, treat,
cure, or prevent any disease.” Unfortunately, many of the terms used in claims have different
definitions than the colloquial meaning which can be misinterpreted by the public. For example,
many dietary supplements are labeled as “natural” which consumers may interpret as being
safe. However, some botanicals are poisonous but are still natural!

Food and Supplement Labeling

While nutrition labeling isn’t directly related to digestion and absorption, it’s an important topic
to cover for the RD exam. Set up another time in your study schedule to read through this
section and do the additional research activities.

Go online and find out which types of products require nutrition labeling and which are
exempt.

Define GRAS.

Understand the difference between health claims, qualified health claims, nutrient
content claims, and structure/function claims

Define the different nutrient content claims for each specified nutrient

Learn which agencies regulate all types of labeling

Define the labeling claims related to organic produce and food products containing
organic ingredients

Here’s some information to get you started.

Health-related claims include health claims, qualified health claims, nutrient content claims,
and structure/function claims. You need to be familiar with these claims for the exam and their
associated legislation. Note that these claims apply to both supplements and foods.

Health claims describe the relationship between a substance or ingredient and the reduced
risk of a disease or health condition. The 1990 Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA)
allows the FDA to issue regulations after reviewing and evaluating scientific evidence of a
health claim. The 1997 Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act allows health claims
based on “authority statements” from the National Academy of Sciences or a US government
scientific body that holds responsibility for citizen public health or nutrition research. A
qualified health claim is one that does not meet the evidence level required for the 1990
NLEA rules but one where the FDA finds enough evidence to issue language (aka qualifying
language) that can be used with to communicate the claim to the reader along with the fact
that evidence is limited. Health claims are subject to review by the FDA prior to sending a
product to market. You can find a list of approved health claims on the FDA website.

If you’re taking the exam in Canada, then you should know that the Food Directorate of
Health Canada develops policies, regulations, and standards related to health claims for
foods, as well as truth in advertising. The Food Directorate classifies health claims as disease
risk reduction claims and function claims. Legislation relating to labeling of foods and dietary
supplements in Canada is regulated by the Food and Drugs Act (not to be confused with the
Food and Drug Administration of the US). You can learn more at www.canada.ca/health-
canada and www.unlockfood.ca

The following health claims are examples of model statements from the US FDA CFR.

e Adequate calcium throughout life, as part of a well-balanced diet, may reduce the risk of

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 24
© 2022 Veritense™

Development of cancer depends on many factors. A diet low in total fat may reduce the
risk of some cancers.

Diets low in sodium may reduce the risk of high blood pressure, a disease associated with
many factors.

Nutrient content claims compare the amount of a nutrient or dietary substance. Some of
these claims are specifically relative to another product. The 1990 NLEA allows for nutrient
content claims if authorized by FDA. Terms such as free, low, high, more, reduced, and lite all
have specific definitions that you need to know. You can download the FDA Nutrient Labeling
Guide from www.fda.gov/FoodLabelingGuide and see the full Appendix A on nutrient content
claims. If you see the term “RACC”, it refers to “reference amount customarily consumed”.

There are different definitions of what “free”, “low”, “reduced/less/fewer’, and “light/lite” mean
for calories, total fat, sodium, sugar, saturated fat, etc. Go online to find the definitions for
“free”, “low”, “reduced/less/fewer’, and “light/lite”, as applicable, for calories, total fat,
saturated fat, cholesterol, sodium, and sugar. You can use the FDA Food Labeling Guide or

another resource based on the FDA guidelines.

If you are taking the Canadian RD exam, you can find Canadian guidelines online at Health
Canada, hittps://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/understanding-food-
labels/nutrient-content-claims-what-they-mean.html.

What would be the best way to organize your research on nutrient content claims? You could
make a separate sheet for each nutrient and write out what the definitions are. You could also
make flashcards for each one. Create a study tool from your research rather than simply
copy-pasting the information you find.

Structure/function claims describe how the ingredient may affect a structure or function of
the body. These claims cannot mention disease and do not require FDA pre-approval but do
require an FDA disclaimer. The 1994 Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act
established regulatory requirements for structure/function claims, claims of well-being, and
claims related to nutrition deficiency diseases. Examples of structure/function claims from the
FDA include:

e Calcium builds strong bones
e Antioxidants maintain cell integrity
e Fiber maintains bowel regularity

Additionally, there is food product labeling guidance from the US Department of Agriculture
for organic foods with specific claims, such as “Made with Organic Ingredients” if at least 70%
of the final products ingredients meet organic criteria. To use the label “Organic” there must
be at least 95% organic ingredients. Specifically, the National Organic Program, established
by the US government in 2001, enforces uniform national standards for agricultural products
sold in the US, while the National Organic Standards are the rules for labeling packaged
products.

Herbals and Botanicals

Per the NIH, “a botanical is a plant or plant part valued for its medicinal or therapeutic
properties, flavor, and/or scent. Herbs are a subset of botanicals. Products made from
botanicals that are used to maintain or improve health may be called herbal products, botanical
products, or phytomedicines.”'*

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 25
© 2022 Veritense™

Standardization of botanical supplements is challenging because the active ingredient is not
always known. Additionally, the different ways botanicals may be prepared and administered
affect the dose consumed. Teas or infusions are made by steeping botanicals in boiling water.
Tinctures involve soaking a botanical in an alcohol water solution and are effective in
concentrating and preserving the product. The tincture strength is communicated as the ratio of
the dried botanical to the volume of the finished product (the alcohol-water solution). Extracts
are made by soaking the botanical in a liquid that is effective at extracting its active ingredients.
That liquid can then be evaporated to create a dry extract that can be consumed as a capsule or
tablet. Because of these different methods of preparation, the way a client consumes botanicals
is important. Consuming peppermint tea is “generally recognized as safe” for self-administration,
but peppermint oil (an extract) can be toxic, if used in excess.

As a dietitian, it’s important to not only know foods your patients and clients consume but what
supplements they take. Certain herbal and botanical supplements can have negative
interactions with each other and with medications the patient may be taking. Certain botanical
supplements can be particularly dangerous for patients with bleeding disorders, patients taking
blood thinners (i.e. heparin, warfarin, aspirin, other antiplatelets), and patients with reduced liver
or kidney function.

Botanical supplements that interact with the body’s ability to clot include black cohosh (causes
increased clotting, decrease effectiveness of blood thinners), garlic (concentrated in supplement
form, decreases clotting), gingko biloba (lowers blood pressure via vasodilation), ginseng
(increases blood pressure). What type of health conditions might you see a patient taking blood
thinners?

Some supplements should be avoided in patients taking diuretics and blood pressure- lowering
medications. These include gingko biloba and ginseng from above, as well as licorice root and
saw palmetto. What type of health conditions might you see in a patient taking diuretics or blood
pressure lowering medications?

Botanical supplements can have drug interactions in 2 ways. First, they can block the
action of the enzyme central to metabolizing the drug, leading to increased concentrations in the
blood. If the un-metabolized form of the drug is the active form, this can lead to toxicity. If the
un-metabolized form of the drug is the inactive form, this can lead to decreased effectiveness.
The botanical supplement can also compete with drugs that use the same metabolic pathway.
Note that if a supplement is metabolized by the liver or kidneys, excess intake can damage
those organs and reduced organ function can lead to excess levels of the botanical in the blood,
resulting in prolonged effects.

CBD oil and supplements can also affect how the body metabolizes over-the-counter and
prescription drugs. Some botanical supplements inhibit the cytochrome P450 liver enzymes
which are responsible for much of the drug metabolism in the liver. Examples include black
cohosh, cranberry, ginkgo (gingko biloba), Panax ginseng (also called American ginseng), milk
thistle, saw palmetto, and valerian.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 26
© 2022 Veritense™

Many blood thinners are metabolized by CYP450 enzymes and interference with their
metabolism can increase or decrease their concentrations in the blood, leading to increased or
decreased effects. Black cohosh can reduce the effectiveness of statins. Gingko can increase
bleeding risk when taken with warfarin. Milk thistle can reduce the effectiveness of warfarin,
phenytoin, and valium.

Kava and comfrey can be toxic to the liver and Valerian root should be avoided in those with
liver disease. St. John’s Wort, typically taken as a “natural remedy” for depression, interacts with
many medications and is an important supplement to look out for. It makes many medications
less effective, including cardiovascular-related medications, anti-seizure medications, birth
control medication, and calcium-containing supplements. St John’s Wort has a high risk for drug
interactions and is recommended to be avoided if taking any over-the-counter medications,
prescription medications, or other supplements. Goldenseal, a plant sold in concentrated form
as a supplement, can also interact with many medications.

Patients may also take vitamins or minerals as supplements, unaware of added fortification in
the food supply and thinking, “more is better”. Certain vitamins and minerals can accumulate in
the body and lead to toxicity. Some vitamins and minerals act as antioxidants and thus, can
interfere with cancer treatments. As you go through the digestion and absorption sections, note
which vitamins and minerals can accumulate in the body versus those that are excreted when in
excess.

Patients going into surgery should not be taking any supplements in the weeks leading up to
surgery as some supplements can increase bleeding risk and affect anesthesia metabolism.
Patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiation may be discouraged from taking supplements
as many interact with cancer treatments to have negative effects, either decreasing the
chemotherapy effectiveness or increasing the toxicity. You can watch a quick video from
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center Grand Rounds about herb-drug interactions in cancer

therapy here: https://www.mskcc.org/videos/herb-drug-interactions-care

Phytoestrogen supplements include alfalfa, red clover, black cohosh, and gingko biloba. They
may be taken in an effort to decrease the severity of menopause symptoms but can have
negative interactions with antiestrogen breast cancer medications (i.e. tamoxifen, raloxifene,
toremifene). Indole-3-carbinol can increase metabolism of the antiestrogen medications and
licorice root has estrogenic activity. Ginseng can also stimulate tumor growth in ER+ type breast
cancer and endometrial cancer.

The number of potential drug-supplement interactions are difficult to count but include
psychotropic medications, glucose lowering medications, blood pressure lowering medications,
blood thinners, anticonvulsants, chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Supplements can also
interact with one another. As you can see, no matter what area of nutrition you end up working
in, you will likely see a client or patient population that is at risk for drug-supplement
interactions. Always asks clients and patients during Nutrition Assessment what supplements
and over-the-counter medications they are taking, and be sure you have a full list of current
prescription medications.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 27
© 2022 Veritense™

|Among... = SCSCSCSd «se ith caution oravoid..w
Patients with ER+ breast cancer Ginseng, soy isoflavone supplements, dong
quai, gingko biloba, ginseng, licorice root,
alfalfa, red clover, black cohosh, indole-3-
carbinol, chasteber

Patients undergoing radiation therap Rhodiola, vitamin A

Patients undergoing chemotherapy Echinacea, gingko biloba, ginseng, green tea,
soy isoflavone supplements, valerian root,
kava, grape seed, St. Johns Wort

Patients with liver disease or decreased liver .
function Kava, valerian root

Patients taking multiple medications St John’s Wort, goldenseal

Patients with low blood cell count Probiotics
This table provides examples and is not comprehensive. It would be impossible to list all
possible drug-supplement interactions for every patient population.

Imagine yourself as a dietitian in the following scenarios. How would you respond?
e You ask all nutrition counseling patients to list their current prescription medications,

over-the-counter medications, and supplements. A patient reports taking St. John’s
Wort, simvastatin, and sertraline. Do you have any concerns about drug interactions?
You are reviewing the chart of a new nutrition consult. The patient has hemophilia and
told the nurse that they take Siberian ginseng to help study and fenugreek to help with
menstrual pain. Are you concerned about this patient taking these supplements?
Why?
You are asked to see an elderly woman for a nutrition consult prior to discharge. She

was admitted after a fall which resulted in a hip fracture. When you meet with her, she
asks you about various dietary supplements that her daughter-in-law told her may help
prevent cancer. She is particularly interested in indole-3-carbinol supplements. What
are you concerned about?

You work in a bone marrow transplant unit. A patient’s mother read that giving the
patient probiotics could help with digestive issues. Is this a good idea? Why or why
not?

The following table lists various botanicals and what they are marketed for, commonly used for,
or what the purported benefits are (meaning what people think the benefits are, not what the
research shows the benefits are). In the last column, additional notes of interest as well as
potential medication interactions or medical complications are listed. This table refers to dietary
supplement intake of the listed botanical (not consumption of food sources). Do not reproduce
this table (such as posting on an online study site) without author permission.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 28
Table 10. Botanical Dietary Supplements

Common uses and
purported benefits

© 2022 Veritense™

Notes and Potential interactions and complications

Can affect MRI test results because can act as a contrast

Acai Weight loss, anti-aging
antioxidant agent. Currently no evidence for rapid weight loss.
Oral (gel): weight loss,
diabetes, hepatitis, IBD, Banned from over-the-counter laxatives in 2002 by the FDA.
immune boost, gastric . . .
Can still be prepared at home - resulting diarrhea can reduce
ulcers : f : :
intestinal absorption of some drugs. Gel has an antiplatelet
Aloe vera Oral (leaf, latex): laxative effect and can enhance the antiplatelet effect of certain
medications. Gel used externally to soothe burns and
Topical (gel): skin abrasions but can cause contact dermatitis reactions in some
vas : individuals
conditions (i.e. acne,
psoriasis), burns
Oral: Colds and hay Often combined with ginseng, angelica, and licorice in Eastern
fever, fatigue, immune medicine as a ‘heart and immune tonic’. May interact with
Astragalus system; galactagogue : f - May eee
immunosuppressives taken for cancer treatment, anti-rejection
Topical: wound healing drugs). May lead to mild GI upset or allergic reactions.
Improve microcirculation
Bilber (varicose veins, venous ‘European’ blueberry. Folk remedy for stopping lactation. Toxic
extra, oe insufficiency), eye in high doses. Do not use if allergic to bilberry, cranberry, or
problems, diarrhea, blueberry.
menstrual cram
Oral: heartburn, nasal
congestion, weight loss, Used in traditional Chinese medicine for indigestion, nausea,
appetite and digestion d ination. Consid . he National
issues. athletic an constipation. onsi ered a stimulant by the Nationa
Bitter orange e rformance Collegiate Athletic Association and is on the banned drug list.
p Commonly used as a replacement for ephedra in dietary
Topical: pain, bruises, supplements. Also used in cooking, beer, and spirits.
fungal infections
Decrease menopause Studies show no estrogenic effects. Increases blood clotting;
Black cohosh | symptoms menstrual avoid with blood thinners. May lead to mild GI upset and in
ymp , rare cases, liver inflammation and allergic reactions. Avoid in
pain, promote labor : .
patients with ER+ type breast cancer.
: . sy: Enzymes found in pineapple. Antiplatelet action — avoid with
Sus pat Osea blood thinners. May increase absorption of antibiotics and
Bromelain » Gig , sedatives. Interacts with blood thinners. Cross-reactivity with
soreness
grass pollen, latex, celery, fennel, carrots, wheat. May be used
for burns to remove dead skin and improve scarring.
Products may contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PA) which can
lead to liver toxicity and lung damage. Banned in some
Urinary tract infection, countries due to concern for liver toxicity. Only consider “PA-
Butterbur stomach upset, hay free” Products though some “PA-free” products have led to
fever, migraines liver damage. Cross-reactivity with ragweed, chrysanthemums,
marigolds, and daisies. Can lead to headache, fatigue,
drowsiness, and Gl upset.
Exacerbates an upset stomach, stomach ulcers, can lead to
Capsicum Circulatory stimulant, irritable bowel symptoms. Can increase bleeding risk. Caution
(cayenne) digestion stimulant with kidney disease, high blood pressure medications, blood

thinners, seizure medication, migraine medication, sedatives,

29

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption

Botanical

Common uses and
purported benefits

© 2022 Veritense™

Notes and Potential interactions and complications

or muscle relaxants. Avoid if allergic to potatoes, tomatoes,
paprika, Jimson weed.

Cascara Stimulant laxative Found in over-the-counter laxatives; can reduce intestinal
sagrada absorption of medications
Viral infections, memory,
Cat’ cancer, arthritis, Gl Can cause dizziness, vomiting, and headache. Can increase
at’s Claw ; a, : ae -
issues (e.g. diverticulitis, | autoimmune symptoms. Avoid with HIV antivirals.
Also used topically for wound healing including mouth sores
Used for indigestion, from chemotherapy but may also lead to contact dermatitis in
Chamomile flatulence, diarrhea, those sensitized to chamomile and have cross-reactivity with
anxiety, sleeplessness echinacea, feverfew, and milk thistle. Internal ingestion can
exacerbate skin rashes.
Mild side effects possible including nausea, headache, itching,
Chasteberry Menstrual pain, infertility, | and Gl upset. Avoid with hormone-sensitive cancers. May
(Vitex) premenstrual syndrome interact with birth control pills, Parkinson’s drugs, and
antipsychotics. Avoid in patients with ER+ type breast cancer.
pier pane pod Inconclusive evidence on lowering blood sugar or cholesterol.
Cinnamon IBS , , Long-term use or high doses can lead to GI upset or allergic
reactions. Extended use of topical applications dangerous for
ne patients with liver disease.
Topical: insect repellant
Oral: decrease Sale of oral comfrey products banned in the US due to risk of
Comfrey nervousness liver damage. Topical use contraindicated for breastfeeding
Topical: pain mothers.
Prevent urinary tract
infections; may be taken | Can lead to kidney stones at high doses; can cause diarrhea
Cranberry to prevent ulcers from H. | and stomach upset in some people. Avoid if allergic to
pylori infections or for its | blueberries or cranberries.
antioxidant activi
Avoid in patients with gallbladder or bile duct issues. May
Diuretic, liver or kidney cause Gl upset or allergic reactions in some. Used as a salad
Dandelion ‘tonic’, digestive issues, green, in wine and teas, and roasted dandelion root used as a
galactagogue coffee substitute. Cross-reactivity with ragweed,
chrysanthemums, marigolds, and daisies.
Avoid with warfarin, aspirin, and during pregnancy and
D . Menstrual pain, lactation. Avoid in patients with ER+ type breast cancer. Can
ong quai . wt : ‘ ws
postpartum depression cause photosensitivity reactions. Common as a ‘female tonic
in traditional Chinese medicine, including postpartum use
Echinacea Oral: Decrease cold
(purple symptoms May cause GI upset or skin rash. Avoid with chemotherapy.
coneflower) Topical: skin issues
Leaves, stem, and unripe berries are toxic. Cooking eliminates
Elderberry Colds and flu, COVID-19 | toxin. The US FDA and FTC took legal action in 2020 against
companies marketing elderberry for COVID-19 treatment.
Eleuthero Called Siberian ginseng but not related to true ginseng. Can
oe Boost immunity, reduce increase blood pressure and blood sugar. Can decrease blood
(Siberian a . wa es
ginseng) stress, adaptogen clotting. Avoid with blood pressure, blood sugar, and blood

thinner medications.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 30

Botanical

Common uses and
purported benefits

© 2022 Veritense™

Notes and Potential interactions and complications
Ephedrine alkaloids banned as a dietary supplement in the US

Ephedra (ma_ | Weight loss, increase in 2004. Active ingredient has amphetamine-like effects. Can
huang) energy lead to high blood pressure, tachycardia, heart attack, and
stroke.
renee aarome. Interacts with HIV medications. Contains gammaz-linolenic acid
Evening meno muse 5 m toms and maternal supplementation increases breastmilk content of
Primrose Oil seroma heuxnatol d , linoleic acid and gamma-linolenic acid, but should not be
ye recommended for this purpose.
arthritis
mistletoe prescriptions for cancer + - NOT approve y
medical condition including cancer.
Fennel seed | Galactagogue Contains a phytoestrogen. Can cause skin and respiratory
allergic reactions
Cross-reactivity with chickpeas, peanuts, and other legumes.
F Diabetes, menstrual Large doses can lead to hypoglycemia — avoid with diabetes
enugreek re ; : : : :
cramps, galactagogue medications. Can interact with warfarin to increase bleeding.
Gl upset common, and liver toxicity possible.
Oral: migraine
prevention, menstrual
sole li-nenonbal Side effects include mild Gl upset and mouth sores if chewed.
eethma ‘innitue , Cross reactivity with chrysanthemums, daises, and marigolds.
Feverfew dizziness nausea and Abrupt cessation after prolonged use may lead to
vomitin , sleeplessness, headaches, anxiety, and stiff or painful
g muscles.
Topical: skin cleanser,
toothaches
Flaxseed and relaanrgl riences Consumption of raw or unripe flaxseeds can lead to toxicity.
flaxseed oil concer menopause , Avoid with pregnancy. Can lead to intestinal blockage if not
, P taken with plenty of water.
symptoms
Garcinia Appetite Suppressant, Active ingredient studied is hydroxycitric acid, found in the fruit
: weight loss, rheumatism, .
cambogia . oe rind.
intestinal issues
. Can decrease blood clotting - avoid with blood thinners,
High blood pressure, . especially warfarin. Interacts with HIV medications. Cross-
high blood cholesterol; . . . : .
. reactivity can occur with hyacinth, tulip, onion, leek, and
Garlic common cold, : . Lg. -
anticancer, galactagogue chives. Topical application can lead to dermatitis and burns.
, Side effects from oral use include mild GI upset and
characteristic body odor and breath.
Nausea, motion
sickness, rheumatoid May interact with blood thinner medications. May lead to
Ginger arthritis, osteoarthritis; heartburn or abdominal bloating. May increase bile flow
galactagogue (caution with gallstones).
Common side effects include headache, high blood pressure,
diarrhea, skin rash, and sleeplessness. May interact and
Adaptogen, diabetes decrease effectiveness of warfarin while increasing effect of
Ginseng (Asian ginseng), immune | sedatives. Long-term use can lead to nervousness, diarrhea,

boost

confusion, and depression. Avoid with hypoglycemic
medications. Avoid in patients undergoing chemotherapy and
patients with ER+ type breast cancer.

31

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption

© 2022 Veritense™

Common uses and
surDoried benefits Notes and Potential interactions and complications

Anxiety, allergies, eye
problems, dementia,
vasodilation, blood

Leaf extract used in Europe for tinnitus, vertigo, cold
peripheries. Ginkgo extract interacts with blood thinners: avoid
with warfarin. Consumption of cooked gingko seeds can lead
to seizures and death. Avoid in patients undergoing
chemotherapy and with ER+ type breast cancer.

Goat's rue Diabetes; galactagogue Caution with hypoglycemic medications.
Colds and hay fever,
ulcers, diarrhea,

Ginkgo pressure, tinnitus,

memory

Alters absorption and/or metabolism of some prescription

Goldenseal constipation, sore gums, medications

eye inflammation, skin

rashes

Venous insufficiency,
Grape seed inflammation high blood Caution with blood thinners. Avoid in patients undergoing
extract pressure, high blood chemotherapy.

cholesterol

Mental alertness,

digestive issues, Note that green tea, black tea, and oolong tea are all from the
Green tea headaches, weight loss, same green tea plant. Avoid supplement form with liver

heart disease, cancer disease and patients undergoing chemotherapy. Can interact
with B blockers.

Topical: genital warts
Anxiety, blood pressure, | May interact with heart failure drugs to increase risk of heart
Hawthorn heart disease, digestive failure progression. May cause dizziness, nausea, and upset
issues, kidney problems _| stomach.
Hoodia Appetite suppressant May cause nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and strange skin
sensations.

Chronic venous

Horse insufficiency. IBS. male May cause dizziness, nausea, and GI symptoms. Bark,
chestnut infertilit ¥ , flowers, leaves, and raw seeds are toxic.
Side effects include diarrhea and skin rash. High doses can
Indole-3- : cause balance issues, tremors, and nausea. Can interact with
carbinol Lupus, cancer prevention blood thinners and increase risk of bleeding. Avoid in patients
with ER+ type breast cancer and bleeding disorders.
Can lead to liver failure; avoid in those with liver disease. Can
Kava Anxiety, insomnia enhance effect of sedative drugs. Avoid in patients undergoing
chemotherapy.
Lavender Anxiety, depression, Gl Topical use may cause allergic reactions

issues

Can increase blood pressure and decrease potassium levels.
Avoid with diuretics and antihypertensives, in patients with
kidney disease, and in patients with ER+ type breast cancer.
High doses during pregnancy associated with premature birth.
Can increase metabolism of warfarin, phenytoin, and valium.

Ulcers, menopause
Licorice root symptoms, cough,
infections, galactagogue

Liver protection; May lower blood sugar — avoid with hypoglycemics. Cross-
Milk thistle diabetes, indigestion; reactivity with daisies, artichokes, ragweed, marigold,
galactagogue chrysanthemum, thistle, and kiwi. May cause diarrhea,
headache, or skin reactions.
Oral (juice): Blood Also called Indian mulberry, beach mulberry, mengkudu, nono,
Noni pressure, prevent nonu, and morinda. May cause hyperkalemia, diarrhea, or liver
infections, anticancer damage.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 32
© 2022 Veritense™

Common uses and
Botanical NEVGrhbH berielite Notes and Potential interactions and complications
Topical (leaves): arthritis,
headache, skin issues

Oral: Anxiety,
sleeplessness, pain,
heart rhythm disorders,
menopause symptoms,

May cause ataxia, confusion, and drowsiness. Can induce

Psyllium seed

diabetes

Passionflower ADHD uterine contractions in pregnancy.

Topical: burns,

hemorrhoids

Oral: IBS, common cold,

sinus infection, digestive

issues, headaches

Topical: headache May cause heartburn, nausea, stomach pain, dry mouth.
Peppermint muscle aches ioint ain Enteric-coated capsules should not be taken with antacids.
oil itchin J pain, Topical application can cause skin rashes. Serious side effects

9 in children from inhaling menthol from peppermint oil.

Aromatherapy: coughs,

colds, pain, mental

acuity, stress

Heart disease, high blood
Une oanate pressure, high blood May cause diarrhea and allergic reactions. Pomegranate root,
oxtr act cholesterol, cancer, stem, and peel contain toxins.

Bulk laxative for chronic constipation. Psyllium husk approved

high blood cholesterol

ane povum Constipation as an over-the-counter medication in the US.
Red clover Non ppauee syimpioms. Contains phytoestrogen. Belongs to legume family.
9 . , Contraindicated during pregnancy and lactation
osteoporosis
, Depression and anxiety, | May cause dizziness, dry mouth, or excessive saliva
Rhodiola : nn . : . a
stress, adaptogen production. Avoid in patients undergoing radiation therapy.
Sore mouth/throat, Thujone, a constituent found in some species and in sage
Sage memory loss, diabetes, essential oil may cause seizures when ingested. Contradicted

during pregnancy.

Saw palmetto

Urinary symptoms from

prostate enlargement,
migraine, hair loss,
chronic pelvic pain

Acts as a diuretic and may cause problems if taken with
diuretic medications. Side effects in some people include mild
GI upset or headache.

Topical: bruises, muscle
pain, wounds

Approved for over-the-counter use. Diarrhea may reduce

Senna Stimulant laxative intestinal absorption of medications.

Menopausal symptoms Contains phytoestrogen ingredients. Side effects include
Soy bone f ealth _ orn ory , stomach pain and diarrhea. Long term use of supplements
: . , may increase risk of endometrial hyperplasia. Avoid in
isoflavones oh on reseure, high patients undergoing chemotherapy and patients with ER+ type

breast cancer.

Ores: dopregsion. toms Interacts with many medications and may make them less
St John's ADHD. OCD. P , effective (including antidepressants, birth control pills, heart
Wort ”? medications, HIV drugs, cancer medications, blood thinners,

statins, and anti-rejection medications). Side effects include
photosensitivity, insomnia, anxiety, dry mouth, GI symptoms,

33

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption

© 2022 Veritense™

Common uses and
Botanical NEVGrhbH berielite Notes and Potential interactions and complications
Be fatigue, headache, and dizziness. Not recommended for use
during pregnancy.
Stinging Postpartum tonic’ for Can cause hives with topical use
nettle anemia; galactagogue

T . Topical only: acne, Oral intake leads to confusion, ataxia, breathing problems, and
ea tree oil ; .
athlete's foot, lice, cuts coma.
Side effects include decreased bone mineralization with long-
Thunder god | Rheumatoid arthritis, term use, infertility, menstrual cycle changes, hair loss, skin
vine multiple sclerosis, lupus rash, diarrhea, and headache. Incorrect preparation can lead
to toxicity as thunder god vine can be poisonous.

Arthritis, digestive issues,

respiratory infection, Major ingredient in curry powder, but also marketed as a
Turmeric allergies, liver disease, dietary supplement. May interact with warfarin and antiplatelet

skin issues (topical drugs and can cause stomach upset.

paste)

Headaches, insomnia, Side effects include dry mouth, GI symptoms, mental dullness,
Valeri anxiety, depression, uneasiness, heart disturbances, and insomnia. Avoid with liver

alerian root , . . .

premenstrual syndrome, | disease and in patients undergoing chemotherapy. Can

menopause symptoms enhance sedative effect of sedatives.
Wild
asparagus Galactagogue Different species than Asparagus officinalis (food species)
root

host pain wee Side effects include Gl upset, tachycardia, anxiety, and high
Yohimbe neuropathy, high blood blood pressure. The yohimbe tree contains yohimbine in the

bark. A standardized form of yohimbine is approved in the US
as a prescription erectile dysfunction drug.

pressure, athletic
performance

Note that some botanicals with purported uses for digestive issues may also cause digestive issues in
some people, or those applied topically for rashes may also cause dermatitis in some.

Sources for information in this table: Drug and Lactation Database (LactMed) at
https://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/books/NBK501922/ and the National Center for Complementary and
Integrative Health website at www.nccih.nih.gov/health

Adaptogens are substances thought to increase endurance and memory. Cross-reactivity means that if
someone is allergic to one plant of a certain family, they may experience allergic reactions to other plants in
the same family. Galactagogues are substances thought to increase breastmilk production during lactation.

Menstrual pain includes breast pain, cramps, and other pain associated with menstrual cycles.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 34
© 2022 Veritense™

The Gastrointestinal System: Digestion and
Absorption

Section References (where not otherwise specified)
e Gropper SS, Smith JL, and Groff JL. Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism. 2009. Boston,

Massachusetts: Cengage Learning. 5" ed. Print.
e Mahan LK, Escott-Stump S. and Raymond JL. Krause’s Food and the Nutrition Care Process. 2012.
Philadelphia, Pa.; Edinburgh: Elsevier Saunders. 13" ed. Print.

Structure

To get started, let’s make sure we're all on the same page. Label the following parts of the
gastrointestinal system (GI system). Think about what other structures you can name, such as
the Ligament of Treitz, and think about what you remember about the role of each in absorption
and digestion. Answers on next page.

—_

Esophageal sphincter
Stomach

Pyloric sphincter
Liver

Gallbladder
Duodenum

Pancreas

Jejunum

o ON OO oa Ff WO ND

lleum

—
oO

Large Intestine

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 35
© 2022 Veritense™

_—s

Esophageal sphincter
Stomach

Pyloric sphincter
Liver

Gallbladder
Duodenum

Pancreas

Jejunum

oo n oOo on +> WY N

lleum

=
oS

Large Intestine

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 36
© 2022 Veritense™

The relationship between certain digestive system structures is key. What happens in these
structures when we eat and drink? What role do they play in turning food and drink into energy?
What happens when something goes wrong with their key functions?

e Esophagus and stomach

e Liver and gallbladder

e Gall bladder, pancreas, duodenum
e Small versus large intestine

For example, the structure of the small intestine (below) includes capillaries and lymph ducts
throughout each villus, and each villus is made up of enterocytes with microvilli. This plays a
crucial role in providing a large surface area for digestion and absorption. When microvilli
become blunted and atrophied, we are unable to digest food well and as nearly intact food
progresses through the digestive system, symptoms develop.

Intestinal lumen

Capillarie
and lymph

Think about the role of each structure in the Gl tract diagram and how dysfunction manifests
when you see a patient.

Digestion
Digestion can be mechanical or chemical.

Mechanical digestion includes chewing, swallowing, peristaltic mixing and propulsion. These
take place in the mouth and stomach. The physical actions affect the food, reducing large
boluses into smaller ones, increasing the surface area for enzymes to act upon, and breaking
up larger molecules into smaller ones. Be able to identify examples of mechanical versus
chemical digestion in the following sections and understand how they work together.

Technically, you could say that mechanical digestion continues in the small intestine because
of peristalsis and segmentation. However, by the time food reaches the small intestine, it is
semi-fluid (chyme) with greatly increased surface area. Chemical digestion breaks down
macromolecules (carbohydrates, fats, proteins) into smaller molecules by the use of acids or

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 37
© 2022 Veritense™

enzymes. We have to break down macronutrients into their building blocks because it is their
building blocks that we absorb.

Enzymes are proteins that catalyze reactions in our bodies. Coenzymes are vitamins that are
necessary to bond with enzymes for them to work. B vitamins play a critical role as coenzymes
in energy production and include pantothenic acid, thiamin, riboflavin, and niacin. That’s why
many companies market B vitamins as energy boosters.

Polysaccharides like amylose, amylopectin, and glycogen are broken down into disaccharides
and monosaccharides. Why? Because our body can only absorb nutrients in certain forms. A
small amount of chemical digestion occurs in the mouth and stomach but the majority occurs in
the small intestine. Digestive enzymes are secreted by the salivary glands in the mouth, the
lining of the stomach and small intestine, and the exocrine cells of the pancreas. Some digestive
enzymes inhibit or stimulate the secretion of additional digestive enzymes and some are
controlled by digestive hormones.

What Happens Where

For the RD exam, it’s important to know what type of digestion happens in what part of the Gl
tract on what type of molecules and what feedback loops the body has in place to control the
digestion and absorption of that nutrient. Understanding digestion and absorption from start to
finish for carbs, lipids, and proteins, means you can use your problem-solving skills to think
about the consequences when one of those pieces goes wrong, which is the basis for much of
the GI disorders seen by clinical dietitians. As you go through this section, think about the
progression of food through the GI tract, what is happening to it, and the process as a whole in
terms of appetite and homeostasis.

Download the Digestion Worksheet online at www.studysmarter.com/freebies or from your
PTEP toolkit, or take out a sheet of paper and draw a table with “carbohydrate”, “protein”, and
“lipid” across the top. For the rows, you'll have the locations in the GI tract — mouth, stomach,
small intestine, and colon. As you read through this section, fill out what happens to each type
of macronutrient as it travels through the digestive system. What form is it in (intact, broken
down?), which enzymes are acting on it, and what other factors (like gastric acid or peristalsis)
are affecting digestion? This overview focuses on digestion but also extends into absorption to
provide you with a full picture. We'll go in-depth on absorption next.

Mouth. In the mouth, there is mechanical digestion via chewing and swallowing, as well as
some chemical digestion of amylose via a-amylase in the saliva. There is no chemical digestion
of protein and very little chemical digestion of fat via lingual lipase. Intact protein and fat droplets
enter the stomach, while polysaccharides have been degraded into oligosaccharides and
disaccharides.

Stomach. In the stomach, there is mechanical digestion via the mixing and propulsion effects of
peristalsis in addition to the 3 layers of the stomach muscles. G cells in the stomach secrete
gastrin which stimulates the release of gastric acid and intrinsic factor from parietal cells and the
release of pepsinogen and gastric lipase from chief cells. Upon contact with gastric acid, the

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 38
© 2022 Veritense™

proenzyme pepsinogen is activated to pepsin. The masticated food that enters the stomach is
turned into semi-liquid chyme via gastric acid and some enzymatic action. Note that there is no
digestion of carbohydrate in the stomach because pepsin acts on proteins and lipase acts on
lipids only. Gastric acid denatures proteins, giving pepsin better access to the peptide bonds
that results in polypeptides entering the small intestine rather than intact proteins. Gastric lipase
helps break down fat droplets into smaller fat droplets, and the controlled gastric emptying
through the pyloric sphincter also mechanically reduces the size of the fat droplets. The lipid
droplets are still full of triglycerides when entering the small intestine. Some lipid-soluble
substances can be absorbed into the blood stream from the stomach, such as alcohol and
aspirin. Some medications are designed to be absorbed in the stomach. Medications that are
meant to be absorbed in the small intestine must be able to survive the acidic conditions of the
stomach.

Small intestine. In the small intestine, there is some mechanical digestion via segmentation
and peristalsis but the small intestine is the main place in the digestive tract for chemical
digestion and absorption. When the semi-liquid chyme enters the duodenum via the pyloric
sphincter, it stimulates the release of pancreatic juice which contains bicarbonate and
pancreatic enzymes, as well as the production and release of bile. These actions are stimulated
by the digestive hormones CCK, VIP, and secretin.

e Why does pancreatic juice have bicarbonate in it?

o Gastric acid has a pH of about 2 which is extremely acidic. The chyme that
enters the small intestine needs to be neutralized for several reasons: so that the
digestive enzymes can work properly and to avoid damage to the intestinal
mucosa.

e What would happen if someone produced excessive gastric acid?

The goal of the small intestine is to finalize the breakdown of macronutrients into a form that can
be absorbed by the enterocytes (aka the small intestine cells). These forms include peptides,
amino acids, monosaccharides, free fatty acids, and glycerol.

Lipids: Bile, produced by the liver and stored in the gallbladder, is crucial for lipid digestion. Fat
entering the small intestine is still in large droplets that need to be broken down into smaller
droplets so they can exist in the aqueous environment of the small intestine. This is aided by
pancreatic lipase which is secreted in the pancreatic juice. Bile includes bile salts which have a
hydrophobic side and a hydrophilic side. The bile salts attach to the lipid droplets, emulsifying
them into smaller and smaller droplets and increasing the surface area upon which pancreatic
lipase can work to cleave triglycerides into free fatty acids and monoglycerides. As for other
types of lipids, phospholipids are cleaved using phospholipase, and most of the cholesterol we
consume is in free form that does not require further digestion. These lipids are transported into
the enterocytes via micelles, which can mesh with the phospholipid bilayer of the cell membrane
and empty their contents into the intracellular space. The free fatty acids re-link inside the
enterocytes to form triglycerides and the fatty globules then combine with proteins inside the
golgi apparatus to form chylomicrons. Chylomicrons are the form in which lipids are transported
from the inside of the enterocytes to the liver and is the only lipoprotein to carry “exogenous”

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 39
© 2022 Veritense™

lipids. The chylomicrons have to be extruded into the lymph capillaries because they are too
large to fit into the blood capillaries. Blood capillaries are only wide enough in diameter to fit red
blood cells in single file lines. The lymph system transports the lipids via chylomicrons and
chylomicron remnants to the liver where they are then repackaged into different lipoproteins
(HDL, LDL, IDL, VLDL) and transported throughout the body. Medium chain fatty acids (or
MCT’s) do not need bile or pancreatic lipase as their length is already short enough to travel into
the blood capillaries directly so they take a different route than the other lipids.

[See image on next page]

Not all digestive enzymes in the small intestine are produced by the pancreas. Intestinal cells
can produce enzymes as well and they are often referred to as brush border enzymes.
Digestible carbohydrates and proteins are broken down using a combination of pancreatic and
brush border enzymes.

Carbohydrates: Glycosidic bonds of oligosaccharides and disaccharides in the small intestine
are broken down by pancreatic amylase (oligosaccharide — disaccharide) and brush border
enzymes maltase, sucrase, and lactase (disaccharide > monosaccharide). Monosaccharides
can then be transported into enterocytes and further into circulation. We also consume DNA and
RNA in our diet, which are digested by the pancreatic nuclease enzymes (ribonuclease and
deoxyribonuclease) into nucleotides. Nucleotides can be absorbed into enterocytes via active
transport. Nucleosidase and phosphatase, which are brush border enzymes, break the
nucleotides down further into pentose sugars, phosphates, and nitrogenous bases which can be
absorbed via passive diffusion.

Protein: Polypeptides in the small intestine are digested by the pancreatic enzymes trypsin,
chymotrypsin, elastase, and carboxypeptidase, as well as aminopeptidase from the brush
border. Note that tripeptides and dipeptides can be transported as-is into enterocytes via active
transport and then cleaved into amino acids inside the enterocyte cells. Amino acids then exit
the enterocytes into the blood circulation where they travel to the liver to join the amino acid
pool.

Large intestine. In the large intestine, mechanical digestion occurs via segmentation (peristaltic
waves) and chemical digestion is performed only by bacteria, not digestive enzymes. lons,
water, vitamins, minerals, and some organic molecules are absorbed in the colon.

By the time chyme reaches the large intestine, much of the water has already been reabsorbed
by the jejunum. The remaining fluids, nutrients, and other organic matter is going to be
absorbed by the colon but the colon will be working against the osmotic gradient to do so. lon
absorption aids in water absorption by creating an electrolyte gradient.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 40
PROCESS

LOCATION LIPID FORM

NOTES

Fat droplet

Bile salts and
smaller fat
droplets

© 2022 Veritense™

Emulsified fat
droplets with
lipase

Fat droplets form in stomach,
mechanical “spraying” from
pyloric sphincter combined

with bile secretion from
gallbladder begins to
separate fat into smaller
droplets

Pancreas stimulated to

release pancreatic juice
which contains lipase
enzymes. Emulsification by
bile salts increases surface
area for lipase to work,
breaking down triglycerides
into fatty acids and
monoglycerides

Micelles form (not
shown) encasing free
fatty acids and
monoglycerides and
facilitate absorption into
enterocytes where free
fatty acids relink into
triglycerides, are
combined into
chylomicrons, and
secreted into the lymph
for transport to the liver

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 41
© 2022 Veritense™

If something has gone wrong in the small intestine, such as insufficient digestion of
macronutrients, the chyme that enters the large intestine will create a reverse osmotic gradient,
causing water to flow into the colon which can lead to diarrhea. Aldosterone is a hormone
involved in fluid homeostasis and works on the endocrine system, as well as the colon to
increase water and electrolyte absorption. Glucocorticoids and the digestive hormone
somatostatin also work on the colon to increase water and electrolyte absorption.

Sodium is absorbed in several ways, including a sodium-hydrogen antiporter and epithelial
sodium channels, while chloride follows the gradient sodium creates and is exchanged for
bicarbonate ions. The concentration of the chyme after water absorption leaves a concentrated
solution of potassium which creates an electrochemical gradient, allowing potassium to diffuse
into the plasma if it is low in plasma or diffuse into the colon if high in the plasma. Commensal
gut microbiota digests the remaining chyme and produce short-chain fatty acids, B vitamins, and
vitamin K.

The bacteria are primarily fermenting soluble fiber, and this reaction produces short-chain fatty
acids including butyrate, acetate, and propionate, as well as gases, including methane and
hydrogen sulfide. Short-chain fatty acids are crucial to human health. Locally in the colon, they
can aid in the absorption of sodium, facilitating the electrolyte gradient and thus, water
absorption. Butyrate is the main energy source for enterocytes in the colon that can stimulate
intestinal gluconeogenesis and has anti-cancer activity. Acetate is crucial for the growth of other
gut microbiota and may be transported throughout the body where it is used in cholesterol
metabolism and lipogenesis. Propionate can be used by the colon epithelial cells for energy but
is also transported to the liver where it can participate in gluconeogenesis.

Vitamins produced by the gut microbiota are important for the health of the gut microbiota itself
but also for the human body. These vitamins include vitamin K, which plays an important role in
blood clotting and prothrombin levels, and all 8 of the B group vitamins (thiamin — B1, riboflavin
— B2, nicotinic acid — B3, pantothenic acid — B5, pyridoxine — B6, biotin — B7, folate — B9, and
cobalamin — B12). Note that nicotinic acid is converted into niacin (B3) and cobalamin is
converted to cyanocobalamin (B12). Not all of the nutrients produced in the colon translate into
more of that nutrient in the body. What do | mean? Even though the gut microbiota in the colon
can produce vitamin B12, our body only absorbs vitamin B12 in the ileum. Any nutrients
produced in the colon that our body can’t absorb there goes to maintain the health of our gut
mucosa and gut microbiota.

Know the types of digestion and their location in the Gl tract, and know which enzymes do what
and where they are secreted from. Go online and do your research to fill out the worksheet with
table header “digestive enzyme, organ/gland secreting it, compound digested”.

Organ/Gland Secreting It Compound Digested

Sucrase Small intestine brush border Sucrose

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 42
© 2022 Veritense™

Gastrointestinal Hormones

In this section, we'll review the different types of gastrointestinal hormones. Pay attention to
where they are produced, where they act (target cells), and what effect they have. Does one
hormone effect the production of another? What implications are there for digestion? | will
mention a few things that you will learn more about later in the absorption section, and then I'll
have you come back and bring it all together. Start a document on your computer or use the Gl
hormone table in the worksheet packet. Fill it out as you go through each paragraph. You may
also find that sketching diagrams as you read through each paragraph helpful.

Gastrin. Gastrin is produced in the stomach by gastric cells, as well as in the upper small
intestine. In the stomach, gastrin stimulates the secretion of gastric acid, intrinsic factor, and
pepsinogen in response to mechanical stretching of the stomach. Gastrin also stimulates gastric
motility and stimulates the growth of gastric cells in the lining of the stomach. In the proximal
duodenum, gastrin stimulates the gallbladder to empty bile into the bile ducts and for the
pancreas to release pancreatic juice into the pancreatic ducts. Gastrin also stimulates intestinal
motility.

What is gastrin’s goal? How does it achieve this goal?

Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is an example of excessive gastrin production due to
gastrinoma(s) in the small intestine or pancreas. Excess gastrin contributes to ulcers in the
small intestine (how?), as well as diarrhea and poor absorption due to damage to the intestinal
mucosal lining. Insufficient gastrin production due to atrophic gastritis can lead to pernicious
anemia, as inadequate gastrin means inadequate intrinsic factor production, and intrinsic factor,
produced in the stomach, is required for vitamin B12 absorption in the ileum. The same effects
can be seen with excessive antacid or proton pump inhibitor consumption which neutralizes the
gastric acid that gastrin stimulates.

Cholecystokinin (CCK). CCK is produced in the small intestine’s mucosal lining and in very
small amounts by brain neurons. CCK acts on receptors in both the gut and the central nervous
system to improve digestion. CCK improves digestion by slowing gastric emptying, stimulating
bile production, and the release of pancreatic juice which includes bicarbonate and enzymes.
CCK release is stimulated by the presence of fat and protein in the stomach and contributes to
sensations of fullness through its action on the nervous system. The presence of bile acids in
the intestine provide a negative feedback loop to reduce the secretion of CCK after sufficient
digestion.

What is CCK’s goal? How does it achieve its goal?

Secretin. Secretin is a peptide hormone produced by duodenal enterocytes and is stored as
prosecretin (inactive form) which is then activated by the presence of gastric acid in the small
intestine as chyme is released through the pyloric sphincter. Secretin regulates duodenal pH by
inhibiting further gastric acid secretion (it inhibits gastrin) and stimulating bicarbonate release
from the pancreas. Secretin also stimulates bile acid production.

What is secretin’s goal? How does it achieve its goal?

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 43
© 2022 Veritense™

Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). Vasoactive intestinal peptide, abbreviated VIP, is
produced in the gut, pancreas, and hypothalamus. VIP affects blood flow by stimulating heart
contractions to increase blood flow to the intestines, increasing intestinal vasodilation (which
lowers blood pressure), and relaxing the smooth muscle of the trachea, stomach, and
gallbladder. VIP also simulates glycogenolysis. VIP stimulates pepsinogen secretion by
stomach cells but inhibits gastrin. VIP stimulates the gallbladder to release bile and the
pancreas to produce pancreatic juice. VIP also stimulates the release of water and electrolytes
into the intestines which is important to make an aqueous solution and have sufficient ion
gradients. You can connect the vasoactive functions of VIP with its name.

What are VIP’s overall goals? Think big picture about how digestion occurs and contrast it with
fight or flight. How are the goals achieved?

GIP. GIP used to be called “gastric inhibitory polypeptide” but is now called glucose-dependent
insulinotropic peptide. As you read through this section, think about why scientists originally
named it gastric inhibitory polypeptide, and think about what the term “insulinotropic” means.
GIP is produced in the duodenum and jejunum. It acts on the stomach to reduce gastric acid
secretion, on the intestines to increase intestinal motility, and on the pancreas to stimulate
insulin release. Other hormones have a stronger effect on gastric acid secretion than GIP.

What is GIP’s goal? How is it achieved?

Motilin. Motilin is produced by M cells in the crypts of the small intestine in order to increase
gastric emptying and promote intestinal motility. It stimulates stomach contractions, gallbladder
emptying, the release of pancreatic juice, and intestinal peristalsis.

What is motilin’s goal? How is it achieved?

Somatostatin. Somatostatin is produced in many tissues throughout the body, primarily
nervous system tissue and digestive tissue, and has a wide range of functions. Related to
digestion, somatostatin is produced in the stomach, small intestine and pancreas. Pancreatic
production of somatostatin is stimulated by the presence of glucose and amino acids in the
blood, that is, glucose and amino acids have already been digested in the small intestine and
absorbed into the blood stream. Somatostatin regulates the activity of many digestive
hormones, including the ones discussed in this section, by inhibiting further secretion to wrap up
the digestive process. Somatostatin acts upon the pancreas to inhibit insulin and glucagon
release. Somatostatin can also act as a neurotransmitter, inhibiting the secretion of TSH and
growth hormone from the pituitary gland.

What are somatostatin’s goals in the digestive system? How are those goals achieved?

Ghrelin. Ghrelin is produced and released primarily in the stomach, though small amounts are
produced and secreted in the small intestine, pancreas, and brain. It is called the “hunger
hormone” because it stimulates appetite by acting on the hypothalamus. It can also promote
storage of fat or the growth of muscle through its effect on the pituitary secretion of growth
hormone. Blood levels of ghrelin in some conditions seem counterintuitive. Ghrelin increases
after dieting efforts and is high in both cachectic states and anorexia nervosa. Ghrelin levels are

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 44
© 2022 Veritense™

lower among obese persons and in those who lose weight via gastric bypass surgery compared
to those losing weight via diet and exercise.

What is ghrelin’s goal? How is it achieved?

Enterostatin. Enterostatin is a peptide hormone derived from the proenzyme procolipase. It can
be produced in the stomach or the small intestine and is stimulated by a high fat diet. How?
Presence of fat can stimulate increased gene transcription of the procolipase gene which is then
activated to enterostatin. Enterostatin acts to increase feelings of fullness, reduce further intake
of fat, and reduce insulin secretion.

What is enterostatins’ goal? How is it achieved?
* Be familiar with hormones that play a role in appetite. *

Peptide YY. Peptide YY has several names that all abbreviate to PPYY. These include
pancreatic peptide YY and peripheral hormone peptide YY, among others. PPYY is secreted
from endocrine cells in the small intestine and is secreted in conjunction with GLP-1 after eating.
PPYY binds to brain receptors to increase satiety and decrease food intake and acts on the
stomach and intestines to decrease motility. PPYY release is stimulated by the presence of fat,
protein, and CCK in the Gl tract. Research shows that more PPYY is released with higher
calorie foods. Conditions with dramatic weight loss often have elevated PPYY levels, including
anorexia nervosa, celiac disease, IBD, and some cancers. Low PPYY levels are associated with
an increased appetite and food intake.

What is PPYY’s goal? How is it achieved?

Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1). GLP-1 is secreted mainly by cells in the small intestine and
in smaller amounts by the pancreas, central nervous system, and large intestine in response to
the presence of food in the GI tract. GLP-1 is part of the incretin super family of hormones which
work to increase insulin secretion. GLP-1 stimulates insulin secretion from the pancreas by
increasing B cell volume, and it also inhibits glucagon release. GLP-1 can reduce gastric motility
and in-between meals, GLP-1 acts on the brain to increase feelings of fullness.

What is GLP-1’s goal? How is it achieved?

Leptin. Leptin is called the “fat controller” hormone and is derived from the Greek word /eptos
which means “thin”. The gene that encodes leptin is known as the ob gene so if you see
research in ob knockout mice, these are known as obese mice as a result of their lack of leptin.
Leptin is released from adipose tissue and acts upon the hypothalamus to control long term
food intake and energy expenditure to inhibit hunger and reduce fat storage. The proportion of
leptin released is relative to the amount of body fat. However, it may not always be effective. In
obese individuals, there are high levels of circulating leptin in proportion to fat mass, but the
brain does not respond to leptin’s effect, signifying /eptin resistance. Go online and research it to
learn more.

What is leptin’s goal? How is it achieved?

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 45
© 2022 Veritense™

Pancreatic insufficiency results in reduced pancreatic enzyme release and consequent
malabsorption. It may be due to cystic fibrosis, chronic pancreatitis, or pancreatic duct
obstruction. In contrast, insufficient release of secretin and CCK may result in functional
pancreatic insufficiency which can lead to villous atrophy and inactivation of pancreatic
enzymes as the acidic gastric chyme is not neutralized. Functional pancreatic insufficiency is
seen in celiac disease as a feedback loop of damaged enterocytes being unable to secret
sufficient hormones.

Before we move on to absorption, let’s review the gastrointestinal hormones just discussed in
relation to where they are produced and where they act. You can go online to find the pre-made
GI Tract worksheet to guide you through which hormones, digestion, and absorption occur
where (www.studysmartermethod.com/freebies) or download it from your PTEP toolkit.

Stomach: Ghrelin is produced in the stomach and acts upon the hypothalamus to stimulate
appetite. Gastrin is produced in the stomach and stimulates gastric acid secretion, intrinsic
factor secretion, and pepsinogen secretion. Gastrin is inhibited by VIP. VIP stimulates
pepsinogen secretion and relaxes smooth muscles of the stomach. Presence of fat in the
stomach stimulates release of enterostatin which will increase satiety and reduce insulin
secretion.

Small intestine: Gastric acid stimulates the activation of secretin which inhibits further gastric
acid production and stimulates pancreatic bicarbonate release in an effort to reduce the pH of
the chyme entering the small intestine. Secretin stimulates the release of pancreatic juice
overall, which includes digestion. Presence of protein and fat stimulate CCK, which stimulates
release of bile and pancreatic juice. VIP also stimulates the release of pancreatic juice and bile,
as well as water secretion, electrolyte secretion, and relaxation of smooth muscle. Motilin
increases intestinal motility and stimulates both PPYY and somatostatin which begin wrapping
up the digestion process. CCK can also stimulate the release of PPYY, which increases satiety
and reduces intestinal motility. Stimulated by fat, enterostatin will increase satiety and reduce
insulin secretion. GLP-1 stimulates insulin secretion from the pancreas through various
methods, inhibits gastric motility and contributes to feelings of satiety.

Large intestine: GLP-1 is released in the large intestine as well and acts upon the pancreas to
stimulate insulin secretion, among its other functions.

As we move on to absorption, think about the timing of the digestive “cycle” and how the Gl
hormones play a role.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 46
© 2022 Veritense™

Absorption

In the digestion section, we touched on macronutrient absorption. In this section, we'll talk about
the types of absorption, what is absorbed where, and how nutrients (macro and micro) are
absorbed.

Active transport is the process of moving ions or molecules across a cellular membrane
against a concentration gradient. This process is completed using enzymes and energy (ATP).
Example: the SGLT-1 transport protein and Na-K-ATPase

Facilitated diffusion uses a carrier protein to transport faster than passive diffusion. Example:
GLUT-2 and GLUT-5 transport proteins.

Passive diffusion relies on moving ions or molecules along a concentration gradient. The
molecule must be able to pass through the phospholipid membrane. Water is able to pass via
simple diffusion because it is small enough to slip between the phospholipid tails of the
membrane. Examples include gas passively diffusing across alveolar surfaces in the lungs, and
passive lipid absorption into enterocytes via pinocytosis.

Can you match the images below with the type of absorption?

yodsur.y aajoe :q ‘(ula}Oud Jed) UOISNYIP payeyI9e :— ‘(jeUUBYD Ula}OId) UOISNYIP payey!oR :g ‘uOISNyIP evlssed :y

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 47
© 2022 Veritense™

It is important to know where in the GI tract nutrients are absorbed because the implications of
surgery or damage to the GI tract will manifest and the associated nutrient deficiencies must be
considered, especially when providing enteral nutrition.

Different references will give slightly different information on where exactly nutrients and other
molecules are absorbed, however the differences tend to be minute, such as one resource
saying that monosaccharides are absorbed in the terminal duodenum and the jejunum, while
another says they are absorbed in the jejunum.

Rather than focusing on what is absorbed in what part of the Gl tract, learn where in the Gl tract
different nutrients are absorbed. By flipping the goal, you can better understand and process the
overlap, as well as the key differences. In example, thinking that most of the B vitamins are
absorbed throughout the small intestine when vitamin B12 is only being absorbed in the terminal
ileum portion. In addition, if something goes medically wrong early on in the Gl tract, such as
lack of sufficient pancreatic enzymes and bicarbonate due to acute pancreatitis, reduced
digestive activity will result in larger-than-normal (aka intact) molecules to reach the later parts
of the intestines. This results in an osmotic gradient that pulls water into the intestinal lumen,
leading to cramping and diarrhea.

Here are some highlights of what you need to know. If anything seems unfamiliar from your
college courses, go online to learn more. Seek out online lecture slides or videos.

Pull out a sheet of paper and vertically write along the left side: stomach, duodenum, jejunum,
ileum, colon, or use the worksheet. Fill in your sheet as you read through this section.

Stomach: Some minerals and other substances are absorbed in the stomach and they include
copper, iodide, fluoride, molybdenum, water, and alcohol. Some drugs may also be absorbed in
the stomach.

Duodenum: In the duodenum, bile is being released, pancreatic juice is providing digestive
enzymes that will travel with the chyme through to the jejunum, as well as the release of
bicarbonate to neutralize the acidic nature of the gastric chyme. Compared to the jejunum, the
duodenum is relatively short. So, while there may be some absorption of carbohydrates,
proteins, vitamins, and minerals before entering the jejunum, you can think of the duodenum as
a “prepping station” for the jejunum. Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, biotin, folate, and the fat-soluble
vitamins can be absorbed in the duodenum in addition to calcium, phosphorus, magnesium,
iron, copper, and selenium. The Ligament of Treitz marks the end of the duodenum and the
beginning of the jejunum, at the duodenojejunal flexure.

Jejunum: While some monosaccharides, peptides, and amino acids may be absorbed in the
duodenum, the majority of the absorption occurs in the jejunum, and the jejunum is where lipid
absorption starts. You can imagine that the bile salts and pancreatic lipase work to emulsify the
lipids while in the duodenum to prep them for absorption in the jejunum. Water-soluble and fat-
soluble vitamins are absorbed in the jejunum, as are many minerals, including calcium,
magnesium, iron, phosphorus, zinc, chromium, manganese, and molybdenum. There is no

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 48
© 2022 Veritense™

physical demarcation of where the jejunum ends and the ileum begins though there are slight
differences in the lumen size and intestinal mucosa. The ileum also contains Peyer’s patches
while the jejunum does not. Go online and research Peyer’s patches.

lleum: In the proximal ileum, absorption is similar to the jejunum. However, vitamin and mineral
absorption is mainly focused on that for vitamin C, folate, Vitamin D, Vitamin K, magnesium and
importantly, vitamin B12, which has traveled from the stomach bound to R protein and will
connect to intrinsic factor here. In the terminal ileum, bile salts and bile acids are reabsorbed by
the body and recycled.

Colon: In the colon, soluble fiber is fermented by gut bacteria which produces short chain fatty
acids which are reabsorbed by the colonocytes. The gut bacteria will also produce Vitamin K
and B vitamins. Note that while these nutrients are absorbed in the colon, they are primarily
used by the colonocytes themselves and not transported into the bloodstream. In contrast,
electrolytes including sodium, chloride, and potassium, as well as water, are absorbed in the
colon for use by the body.

Now we'll go through absorption nutrient by nutrient, focusing on activity at the brush border.
Carbohydrates

Glucose and galactose are absorbed at the brush border via both active transport (using the
sodium glucose co-transporter (SGLT-1)), and facilitated transport (using GLUT 2). Fructose is
absorbed via facilitated diffusion using the GLUT5 transporter. Note that presence of the SLGT-
1 transporter is denser in the duodenum and jejunum so more glucose and galactose absorption
occur there. SLGT-1 is able to transport glucose into the enterocyte because of the sodium-
potassium-ATPase pump on the basolateral membrane that creates a sodium gradient. Glucose
moves from inside the enterocyte into the blood within the portal vein which goes to the liver

(s ] yo amylase

sucrase

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 49
© 2022 Veritense™

using facilitated diffusion via GLUT-2, with ions following to maintain isotonic osmolarity. The
diagram below shows the enzymes and transporters embedded in the brush border (aka that
apical membrane of the enterocyte).

In the next few pages, there is a diagram that shows carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids being
absorbed into enterocytes and then into the capillaries or lymph through the basolateral
membrane.

Protein

Protein is denatured to polypeptides in the stomach via pepsin and gastric acid. In the intestinal
lumen, polypeptides are hydrolyzed to free amino acids (40% of total ingested) and
oligopeptides (60% of total ingested) by pancreatic enzymes secreted in the pancreatic juice.
These include trypsin, chymotrypsin, elastase, and carboxypeptidase. At the brush border,
endopeptidase and aminopeptidase digest the oligopeptides into dipeptides and tripeptides.
These dipeptides and tripeptides are transported into the enterocyte via proton-dependent
peptide transporter (PepT1) and then hydrolyzed into amino acids within the enterocyte by
dipeptidase and tripeptidase. Dipeptides and tripeptides are absorbed more quickly from the
intestinal lumen than free amino acids. Free amino acids are transported into the enterocyte via
sodium transporters which, like with glucose, the sodium concentration gradient is maintained
by the sodium- potassium-ATPase pump at the basolateral enterocyte membrane. Amino acid
absorption is R-group specific, and there are different brush border transporters for different
types of amino acids. Since transporters are enzymes and enzymes have particular active sites,
it makes sense that a transporter for a basic amino acid would not work for an acidic amino
acid. On the basolateral membrane, amino acids are transported into the blood within the portal
vein which goes to the liver via amino acid transporters.

Lipids

Free fatty acids and monoglycerides are packaged into micelles to aid them in the aqueous
environment of the intestinal lumen. They are transported into enterocytes via passive diffusion
(pinocytosis) as the phospholipid layer of the micelle merges with the phospholipid layer of the
enterocyte. There are also fatty acid transporter proteins in the apical membrane of the
enterocyte.

Unlike peptides that are broken down into free amino acids in the enterocyte before transport
out of the basolateral side, free fatty acids and monoglycerides are first repackaged into
triglycerides in the Golgi apparatus and then packaged into chylomicrons. Chylomicrons are the
lipoprotein that carries exogenous lipids (dietary lipids) to the liver via lacteals, also known as
the lymphatic capillaries. Lacteals merge into large lymphatic vessels and enter the blood
stream at the subclavian vein. In the blood, the enzyme lipoprotein lipase degrades the
chylomicron to chylomicron remnants which are taken up by the liver. The liver recycles the
lipids that are delivered into very low-density lipoproteins that are also degraded by lipoprotein
lipase in the blood and deliver lipids to adipose tissue. Free fatty acids released via lipoprotein
lipase are taken up by the tissue. As the very low-density lipoprotein loses additional lipids, it
becomes smaller and denser which results in a change to high-density lipoproteins.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 50
© 2022 Veritense™

Qo0o718 ONY
Hd WAT OL

¥3An
SHL OL

51

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption
© 2022 Veritense™

Vitamins

Go online to find the DRIs for vitamin intake. Create your own table and add extra space for
notes in this absorption section. Create sections for how the vitamin is found in food, how it is
absorbed, signs for its deficiency and toxicity, and other notes.

Vitamin B12. Also known as cobalamin, vitamin B12 is absorbed in the terminal ileum but in
order to be absorbed, it requires intrinsic factor. Intrinsic factor is a glycoprotein produced by
gastric parietal cells. In the stomach, vitamin B12 binds to R protein, allowing it to travel through
the GI tract where it will split away from R protein and bind to IF in the ileum before being
absorbed there. Patients undergoing gastrectomy, whether due to cancer, trauma, or gastric
bypass surgery, can develop a deficiency in intrinsic factor resulting in a vitamin B12 deficiency.
In these cases, the resulting pernicious anemia is not a result of inadequate vitamin B12 intake
but rather inadequate absorption. Treatment, therefore, must be intramuscular vitamin B12
injections, not oral supplements.

A gastric bypass patient comes in for her regular check-in and has lab values indicating
pernicious anemia. Through your nutritional interview, you discover that she has been taking
vitamin B12 supplements but has been skipping appointments for her IM injections because she
is afraid of needles. She doesn’t understand why it matters if she takes vitamin B12 orally or
not. You explain to her why...

Folate is the general name for vitamin B9, with major dietary forms as folate and folic acid.
Folate is the natural form of the vitamin while folic acid is the synthetic form found in
supplements and fortified foods. Folic acid, or synthetic folate, has one glutamate molecule and
is more stable against heat, oxidation, and light than folate. In contrast, naturally occurring
dietary forms of folate are polyglutamates, with more than one glutamate molecule that must be
cleaved prior to absorption. It follows that folic acid has higher bioavailability than folate and
thus, to estimate a DRI, dietary folate equivalents (DFEs) were created to normalize micrograms
of food folate with micrograms of folic acid. The DRI for folate is based on the assumption that
folic acid is 85% bioavailable and folate is 50% bioavailable, producing a conversation factor of
1.7 (85% / 50% = 1.7).

1 DFE =1 4g food folate = 0.6 ug food folic acid
= 0.5 ug folic acid on empty stomach

DFE = ug food folate + (ug folic acid x 1.7)

The RDA for folate is the same for males and females but increases with age, pregnancy, and
lactation. During pregnancy, the DRI increases to 600 mcg DFE and is still elevated during
lactation at 500 mcg DFE.

Why do folate requirements increase with age? Why do pregnant and lactating women need
more folate than when they are not pregnant or lactating? Go online to research.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 52
© 2022 Veritense™

Once folate is in the monoglutamate form, it is transported into the enterocytes via active
transporter PCFT and through the basolateral membrane via MDR-3. When folic acid is present
in high forms, it can be absorbed into enterocytes via passive diffusion. Half of our folate body
stores are stored in hepatic tissue, with the rest in blood circulation (used as a biomarker in
blood lab values) and peripheral tissues.

Go online and research the roles folate plays in the body. What are risk factors for folate
deficiency and how does that deficiency manifest in signs and symptoms?

Thiamin, or vitamin B1, is part of an important coenzyme TPP (thiamin pyrophosphate) which is
made up of 1 thiamin molecule and 2 phosphates. Thiamin from dietary sources can be in its
free form (from plants) or as TPP (from animals). In the intestinal lumen, TPP is cleaved to free
thiamin which is absorbed via THTR1 and THTR2 on the apical enterocyte membrane and then
absorbed into circulation via THTR1 on the basolateral membrane. Thiamin absorption adjusts
based on total body thiamin status, that is, when thiamin levels are high or adequate, thiamin
absorption decreases, and when thiamin levels are low, absorption increases.

Thiamin deficiency can manifest as both dry beriberi or wet beriberi and may be seen in
countries that consume “polished” rice which removes the outer hull of the rice containing
thiamin. Dry beriberi includes nervous system symptoms, such as numbness, tingling and loss
of muscle function. Wet beriberi, named for its sign of pitting edema, affects the cardiovascular
system. Someone with wet beriberi can be malnourished with wasting but also manifest with
extreme edema.

Thiamin deficiency can also manifest as Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, which is typically seen
in alcoholics for several reasons: alcohol replaces dietary sources of thiamin, alcohol damages
the liver’s ability to convert thiamin to TPP, and it increases thiamin excretion in the urine. Signs
and symptoms include neurological impairment, including odd eye movements, poor muscle
coordination, memory loss and confusion, and paralysis. Finally, genetic defects in the THTR
gene can lead to thiamin deficiency. You may see thiamin written as “thiamine”, which is the old
spelling when vitamin used to be “vitamine”.

Riboflavin is the B vitamin that when taken in excess, leads to bright yellow urine. Note that in
Latin, flavin means yellow. Riboflavin, or vitamin B2, is crucial to the production of two enzyme
cofactors used in energy metabolism: FAD and FMN. Riboflavin is easily degraded by light and
that is the reason that milk is now packaged in cartons and opaque containers, rather than the
old-fashioned, clear glass jugs. Riboflavin is either found in food in its free form, bound to
protein, or as FAD or FMN. All bound forms are cleaved to free riboflavin before absorption, with
high absorption levels in the intestines using RFVT3 on the apical membrane and RFVT2 on the
basolateral membrane. Excretion is through the urine. Vitamin B2 deficiency is relatively rare
and if seen, it usually co-occurs with other nutrient deficiencies. Signs include angular stomatitis
(also called cheilosis and angular cheilitis), glossitis, sore red eyes, and dermatitis.

Go online to find pictures of angular stomatitis and glossitis if you are not familiar with the terms
or did not see examples during clinicals.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 53
© 2022 Veritense™

Niacin, or vitamin B3, exists in two forms: nicotinic acid and nicotinamide (niacinamide). Niacin
is present in two important cofactors as nicotinamide: NAD and NADP-+. Niacin can be
synthesized in the body from tryptophan, though this reaction and others involving niacin
typically require riboflavin and vitamin B6 as cofactors. Niacin DRIs are measured as niacin
equivalents because niacin can be synthesized from tryptophan. It takes 60 mg tryptophan to
make 1 mg of niacin so the equivalents are 1 mg Niacin = 1 NE and 60 mg tryptophan = 1 NE.
Tryptophan intake is typically estimated as 1% of the amino acids in a protein so the amount in
food can be calculated as 1% of the total protein. The NE from the calculated tryptophan is then
added to the NE from niacin to determine total niacin intakes.

Which other B vitamin has an equivalency factor?

Niacin absorption is typically high, except in some cereal products like corn and wheat, where it
is tightly bound. For example, nearly 70% of niacin in corn is unavailable. Pellagra results from
niacin deficiency and was prevalent in the US in the early 1900s due to the dependence on corn
as a staple crop. Pellagra signs are the 4 D’s: dementia, dermatitis, diarrhea, and death. The
low bioavailability of niacin in corn can be increased by treating the food with a base.

Once absorbed into the enterocytes, nicotinamide is the primary circulating form in the body.
However, nicotinic acid is used pharmacologically at levels above the niacin RDA to optimize
plasma lipid profiles. Unlike nicotinamide, nicotinic acid can result in toxicity so pharmacologic
solutions are typically in extended-release form. Signs of toxicity include niacin flush, painful
tingling sensations, Gl distress, and liver damage.

Go online to find the UL for nicotinic acid intake.

Pantothenic acid (vitamin B5) plays 2 crucial roles in the body. It is part of coenzyme A
(abbreviated as CoA, like in succinyl CoA and acetyl CoA) and it is part of acyl carrier protein
(ACP) which plays an important role in lipogenesis, as does acetyl CoA. Thus, vitamin B5 is
important in the intersection of glucose, protein and lipid metabolism because acetyl CoA is
central to all 3 processes. Pantothenic acid in food is in the form of CoA, which is then cleaved
to pantothenic acid and absorbed into the enterocytes via the sodium-multivitamin transporter
(SMVT) via active transport. About half of what we consume is absorbed, with excess excreted
in the urine like other B vitamins.

Vitamin B6, or pyridoxine, has 3 main forms including pyridoxamine, pyridoxine, and pyridoxal.
Active vitamin B6 is phosphorylated and all 3 forms can be activated to pyridoxal phosphate
(PLP) by replacing one hydroxyl group with a phosphate group using FMN (riboflavin cofactor).
Vitamin B6 in the diet is found in the cofactors PLP and to a lesser extent PMP (pyridoxamine
phosphate) in animal products, as well as pyridoxine in plant sources. PLP and PMP are
dephosphorylated and absorbed as free pyridoxine via passive diffusion. Free pyridoxine is
converted to the circulating forms, pyridoxal and PLP.

Unlike other B vitamins (except for niacin), excess intake can lead to vitamin B6 toxicity which
leads to neurological damage. Patients with carpal tunnel, morning sickness, and PMS may

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 54
© 2022 Veritense™

receive vitamin B6 supplementation under doctor supervision. Research evidence for these
uses is inconclusive.

Vitamin B6 deficiency is rare but can lead to microcytic hypochromic anemia due to low heme
synthesis rates and neurological symptoms due to decreased neurotransmitter production.

Biotin (vitamin B7) exists in dietary sources as free biotin and biocytin (also called biotinyl|
lysine). Biocytin must be cleaved prior to absorption and in the intestinal lumen, biotinidase
cleaves biocytin into biotin and lysine. Free biotin is highly absorbed in the small intestine using
the sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter. Avidin, a protein in raw egg whites, binds tightly
to biotin preventing its absorption. Avidin is denatured by cooking.

Vitamin C in food sources is primarily in the form of ascorbic acid with some dehydroascorbic
acid presence. Vitamin C absorption in the small intestine occurs via active transport using a
sodium-vitamin C co-transporter (SVCT) that is similar to how glucose is co-transported with
sodium as well. Ascorbic acid travels unchanged to the basolateral enterocyte membrane and
diffuses into the blood through the portal vein for circulation. Like other water-soluble vitamins,
vitamin C is not stored, per se, in any particular tissue but is taken up by the cells using SVCT
so that the cellular amount of vitamin C is always much higher than plasma. Vitamin C
concentrations are particularly high in the pituitary and adrenal glands, which makes sense
because it is an important coenzyme for the metabolism of epinephrine and its cousin
hormones.

Excess vitamin C can lead to diarrhea, gastrointestinal cramping, and increases in uric acid and
oxalic acid excretion which increases the risk of kidney stones. Like with many vitamins, signs of
vitamin C deficiency and toxicity are manifestations of the vitamins function in the body. In
addition to its antioxidant and coenzyme functions, vitamin C plays a crucial role in maintaining
the integrity of collagen in the body’s connective tissues. Vitamin C deficiency manifests as
scurvy with signs of bleeding gums and weak connective tissues.

Vitamin C can increase the absorption of other micronutrients. Go online and research.

Vitamin A is the dietary precursor to its active form, retinoic acid (note that it has COOH in the
terminal position). Other forms of Vitamin A that are relevant to digestion, absorption, and
metabolism include retinol! which is the alcohol form with a terminal hydroxyl group (-O#), retinyl
esters with a terminal -O-alkyl unit, and retinal as the aldehyde form with a terminal aldehyde
group (-CHO). Retinyl esters are the storage form of retinol, created by adding a fatty acyl group
to retinol. In the intestinal lumen, 8 carotene is absorbed via passive diffusion into the
enterocytes and retinyl esters are hydrolyzed to retinol. Along with B carotene, these forms of
vitamin A are transported into the enterocyte.

All forms of vitamin A are then re-esterified into retinyl esters to be incorporated into
chylomicrons in the Golgi apparatus and transported via chylomicron remnants to the liver.
However, note that only a fraction of B carotene and other carotenoids are converted to active
forms of vitamin A and thus, are not particularly good sources of dietary vitamin A. In the liver,
vitamin A is converted back to retinol, attached to retinol-binding protein, and transported with

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 55
© 2022 Veritense™

transthyretin (TTR) to peripheral tissues. Note that the majority of vitamin A is stored in the liver,
not in the fatty tissues.

Circulating levels of vitamin A are tightly controlled, meaning vitamin A deficiency won't manifest
in blood biomarkers until all vitamin A stores are exhausted.

Vitamin A deficiency can lead to xerophthalmia and hyperkeratosis. Vitamin A deficiency is
prevalent in the developing world and efforts to increase vitamin A intake by modifying corn and
rice with added B carotene have been in the works for many years. These include the Golden
Rice initiative. Vitamin A toxicity includes signs of blurred vision, skin disorders, joint pain, weak
bones, and liver abnormalities. While vitamin A is important in fetal development, too much can
lead to birth defects, which is why cautions are taken among women of reproductive age when
taking retinoid-containing acne medications. Excessive consumption of 8 carotene won't lead to
vitamin A toxicity but rather, a nontoxic condition where carotenoids accumulate in
subcutaneous fat giving the skin an orange color.

Why won't excessive consumption of B carotene lead to vitamin A toxicity?

Vitamin D has several provitamin forms, including ergocalciferol (vitamin D2) formed from
ergosterol and found in plants and supplements, and cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) which is found
in animals and now in some supplements. Vitamin D3 is also produced in the body from 7-
dehydrocholesterol which forms in response to sun exposure. When vitamin D is consumed in
the diet, whether from food sources or supplements, it is absorbed in the small intestine with the
help of bile salts, just like lipids. Vitamin D2 and Vitamin D3 travel to the liver to be activated into
calcidiol (25-hydroxyvitamin D3) which then travels to the kidney to be activated to its final
active form, calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3). It is this active form that enhances the
absorption of both calcium and phosphorus in the small intestine, playing a crucial role in
maintaining calcium and phosphorus homeostasis in the body. Excess vitamin D is stored in
adipose tissue and can be excreted in two ways: in bile or through conversion to water soluble
metabolites and excreted via urine.

Go online and find a diagram describing vitamin D production and activation.

Vitamin E is emulsified along with lipids and transported into jejunal enterocytes via micelles, to
the liver via chylomicrons, and to the tissues via VLDL. Vitamin E is delivered to cells in nearly
all tissues with excess being stored in the liver, adipose tissue, and cellular membranes. It can
also be excreted in feces.

Vitamin K has several forms including phylloquinone (vitamin K1) and menaquinones (vitamin
K2). The main form of vitamin K in the diet is phylloguinone from green, leafy vegetables.
Menaquinones are produced from gut microbiota processes in the large intestine. Vitamin K is
emulsified along with lipids, like vitamin E, absorbed in the ileum, packaged into chylomicrons,
transported to the liver via chylomicron remnants, and then delivered to peripheral tissues,
including the heart, brain, pancreas, and bone. Because vitamin K has a short half-life (it is
rapidly metabolized and excreted), both blood and tissue levels are low. Most of vitamin K is
excreted in the feces and the rest is excreted in urine.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 56
© 2022 Veritense™

Minerals

Iron. Iron is absorbed in the duodenum as free iron, or ferrous iron (Fe?*). Iron can be
consumed as ferrous iron, ferric iron (Fe**), or heme iron (Hgb-Fe**). However, iron can only be
absorbed by enterocytes as Fe** or Hgb-Fe**. Iron supplements are typically in ferrous form as
this form of iron can be readily absorbed without further reduction from Fe** to Fe?*. The heme-
iron complex is absorbed faster than free iron and is not affected by iron absorption feedback
loops in the body. Acid and vitamin C are commonly used to improve non-heme iron absorption
because they can reduce ferric iron to the ferrous form. Additionally, vitamin C can form a water-
soluble complex with iron to enhance absorption. In contrast, calcium, phytates, oxalates, and
polyphenols inhibit iron absorption though not significantly enough to cause an iron deficiency.

Go online and research what types of food are high in calcium, phytates, oxalates, and
polyphenols. What implications would these foods have if a patient was eating them in
conjunction with iron-rich foods or with their iron supplement?

Once inside the enterocytes, Fe?* binds to apoferritin creating ferritin (the storage form of iron in
cells), and this complex is then transported across the basolateral membrane into the blood via
the portal vein. Note that apoferritin is simply ferritin without bound iron. Heme-iron can be
absorbed as-is without breaking the bond in the intestinal lumen. Once in the cell, the heme-iron
complex is broken down by lysosomal enzymes and, just like with free iron intake, the Fe?*
binds to apoferritin to create ferritin. In the blood, iron binds to transferrin and is transported to
the liver. Transferrin is a glycoprotein that binds iron in the blood and thus, levels of transferrin
in the blood are inversely related to the amount of free iron in the blood.

Review different types of anemia and the role of iron in them (or lack thereof). Review your lab
values worksheet and the different markers for anemia.

Selenium is readily absorbed in the body with homeostasis maintained by urinary excretion
rather than controlling intestinal absorption. Selenium is found in our diet as either organic
selenium, found in soil and incorporated into plants that we eat, animal meat from animals that
consume those plants, or in its inorganic form conjugated with sodium. Selenium can be
concentrated in the food chain which can become a problem when there is severe water run-off
in an area with high-selenium soil. In the body, selenium plays an antioxidant role and is
involved in iodine metabolism. Selenium deficiency signs include nausea, fatigue, diarrhea, and
in severe cases, brittle hair and nails, skin rashes, and abnormalities in the nervous system.

lodine is necessary for thyroid hormone synthesis. In the food supply, iodine is typically found
as iodide (I-) and can be found in soil, sea water (and thus seaweed, seafood, and
crustaceans), dairy (due to fortified animal feed) and iodized salt. The iodide ion (I-) is absorbed
throughout the small intestine from food and water though it can also be absorbed in the lungs
and skin. lodine is transported from the Gl tract to the thyroid via plasma proteins.

Goiter, which can result from insufficient iodine in the body, is seen more often in countries that
lack access to iodized salt. Goiter is when the thyroid enlarges in efforts to increase iodide
uptake. lodine deficiency during pregnancy can lead to cretinism in the infant which is

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 57
© 2022 Veritense™

characterized by stunted physical growth and mental development, speech loss, paralysis, and
hypothyroidism. Some foods can exacerbate iodine deficiency and these include cassava which
is found in tropical and subtropical regions that may already be susceptible to iodine deficiency.
Millet, cruciferous vegetables, soybeans, peanuts, onions, and garlic also contain compounds
that interfere with iodide digestion and absorption.

Manganese is a cofactor for the superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme along with copper and
zinc. Superoxide dismutase converts superoxide (a radical) to hydrogen peroxide which can
then be converted to water. Manganese is also involved in the Kreb’s cycle via its role with
oxaloacetate. Manganese is absorbed in low proportion to its intake, but deficiency and toxicity
are very rare. Manganese is excreted via bile.

Calcium is absorbed as Ca”* via calcium channel TRPV6 (transit receptor potential V6).
Calcium binds to calbindin which facilitates transport into the enterocyte using the calcium
channel. Calcium crosses the basolateral membrane via the calcium-magnesium ATPase

pump.

High vitamin D levels increase the transcription of calbindin which facilitates calcium absorption.
Oxalate and phytates inhibit some calcium absorption. Foods high in oxalates include spinach,
rhubarb, dried beans, and sweet potatoes. Phytates are found in whole grains and legumes.

High intakes of calcium supplements can lead to calcification of soft tissues and kidney stones.
High intakes of vitamin D supplements, because of its effect to enhance calcium absorption, can
lead to these same signs. Vitamin D deficiency resulting in hypocalcemia leads to rickets in
children and osteopenia and osteoporosis in adults.

Phosphorus is found in animal products as phosphate and in plant products as phosphorus
and phytate. Phosphorus has many important functions in the body including maintenance of
the strength of bones and teeth via hydroxyapatite, phosphorylation (to create G6P),
phospholipids in the cellular membranes, part of DNA and RNA as phosphate backbones, part
of ATP (our “energy currency”), and as secondary messengers in the cells, cAMP and IP3.
Phosphorus is absorbed primarily as phosphate via sodium co-transport with absorption
becoming increased by high levels of vitamin D. When phosphate intake is high, paracellular
absorption (where phosphate passes in between cells rather than through enterocytes into the
blood stream) is a significant method of phosphate absorption.

Calcium, vitamin D, and phosphorus are key for bone health. Draw out a diagram or talk
yourself through how they are connected.

Zinc is absorbed into the enterocytes as Zn** via the ZIP4 transporter. Once in the enterocyte, it
can be used by the enterocyte itself, bind to thionein for storage as metallothionein, or bind to
CRIP (cysteine-rich intestinal protein) and then get transported across the basolateral
membrane via ZnT to finally bind to albumin in circulation. We absorb up to 40% of the dietary
zinc that we consume. The body’s stores of zinc are in the liver, bone, pancreas, and kidney.
Zinc is excreted in the feces via sloughed enterocytes. High intakes of zinc will increase

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 58
© 2022 Veritense™

transcription of thionein and shift zinc activities towards storage rather than circulation. Phytate,
oxalate, polyphenols, and non-heme iron all inhibit zinc absorption.

Make a note of the different compounds (phytates, oxalates, etc.) that inhibit absorption of
nutrients — rather than what a nutrient is inhibited by. You'll want to know it “both ways” for
problem solving on the exam.

Copper is found in an oxidized form as cupric (Cu?*) and a reduced form as cuprous (Cu"*).
Dietary cupric copper is reduced to cuprous copper for absorption, with this enzymatic reduction
stimulated by vitamin C. Once transported into the enterocyte, copper can either be used for
functional purposes inside the cell, bind to thionein (like zinc does), or get transported across
the basolateral membrane via ATP7A. Before entering circulation, cuprous copper is oxidized to
cupric copper, the preferred form to bind albumin. Copper is stored in the liver as
metallothionein and transported to peripheral tissues via ceruloplasmin. Excess copper is
excreted in feces via sloughed enterocytes.

Study Guide Questions

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your first pass at
applying the knowledge you've read and practiced in example calculations in a question-and-answer
format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your notes. Because these questions
are intended to be used as a guide to apply your knowledge and develop your critical thinking skills, not a
test, and because the answers are in this document, there is no answer sheet.

Why can glucose in the liver be circulated to other organs but glucose in the muscle cannot?
Which polysaccharides can the human body digest? Which can it not? Why?

What does a conditionally essential amino acid mean? In what states are they conditionally essential?
What is an example of a complete protein? What does that mean?

of ON >

What is the difference between protein from animal sources and plant sources? What are the
implications for digestion and absorption?

Which types of nutrients are more or less likely to have a UL? Why?

Connect gastrin and vitamin B12.

Connect gastrin and protein digestion.

o ON

Name the hormones that...

Play a role in satiety f. Stimulate pancreatic juice release

Play a role in stimulating appetite g. Affect blood glucose levels (how?)

Affect Gl tract motility h. Are released upon eating

Affect Gl tract pH i. Are released towards the end of digestion
Stimulate bile production

oaoop

10. Which vitamins or minerals have “dietary equivalent” units for the DRIs? Why?
11. How are the activation and function of B complex vitamins related to each other? What key processes
are they involved in?

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 59
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions

Answer these practice questions using the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™ that you read about in
Chapter 2 and 3 of the Study Smarter Method for the RD-Exam section. Instead of answering these
questions using your memory and logic, use the study guide text and/or your own research to determine
which answer is correct (and why), and why the other answers are incorrect. Pay attention to the question
itself, and be sure you know what the question is asking. There are answers with explanations following.
If this is your first set of practice questions, go back and skim Chapters 2 and 3 in the Study Smarter
Method for the RD-Exam section to remind yourself of the types of questions and how to answer them.

1. Which of the following is not an example of mechanical digestion?
a. Chewing
b. Swallowing
c. Peristalsis
d. Enzymatic action

2. Your patient is undergoing radiation therapy and you are concerned when you learn they
are taking this supplement.
a. Vitamin A
b. Valerian root
c. Red clover
d. Prebiotics

3. The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 defines dietary supplements
as products that:
a. Contain 22 dietary ingredients or constituents
b. Can be taken by mouth or topically
c. Are labeled as dietary supplements
d. Are intended to reduce the risk of a specific disease

4. The omega-3 fatty acids include a-linolenic acid (ALA), found in ;
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), found in , and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA),
found in .

a. Flaxseed and canola oil, fish oil and shellfish, animal fat and fish oil

b. Fish oil and shellfish, linseed and soybean oil, animal fats and walnuts
c. Animal fat and fish oil, fish oil and shellfish, flaxseed oil and walnuts
d. Soybean oil, marine algae, flaxseed oil

5. Which of the following statements is NOT true?
a. Chief cells release pepsinogen
b. G cells secrete gastrin
c. Chief cells release gastric acid
d. Parietal cells release intrinsic factor

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 60
© 2022 Veritense™

. A patient is instructed to take iron supplements. What additional information should you
provide them?

a. Take iron supplements with vitamin C

b. Take iron supplements with a high-fiber snack

c. Avoid taking iron supplements with milk or tea

d. Do not take iron supplements with a meal containing meat

. Which of the following is true regarding vitamin consumption?

a. Excessive consumption of beta carotene will NOT lead to vitamin A toxicity
b. Excessive consumption of beta carotene WILL lead to vitamin A toxicity

c. Excessive consumption of cholecalciferol will lead to vitamin D toxicity

d. Excessive consumption of ergocalciferol will lead to vitamin D toxicity

. Which of the following statements is true regarding vitamin K?

a. Menaquinone is the main form of dietary vitamin K

b. Phylloquinone is form of vitamin K produced by gut microbiota
c. Vitamin K is excreted mainly via urine

d. Blood levels of vitamin K are typically low due to a short half-life

. Apatient with osteoporosis is instructed to take calcium supplements. In reviewing their
3-day food recall, you are concerned that they regularly take their calcium supplement
with meals or snacks containing

White bread

Spinach

Vitamin C

Dairy

ao

10. Phytates do not inhibit the absorption of

a. Zinc
b. lron
c. Calcium
d. Vitamin C

11. Iron is absorbed by enterocytes in the form and copper is absorbed in the

form.
a. Oxidized, reduced
b. Reduced, oxidized
c. Reduced, reduced
d. Oxidized, oxidized

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 61
© 2022 Veritense™

12. Which of the following amino acids is ketogenic only?
a. Lysine
b. Alanine
c. Glutamate
d. Valine

13. A vegetarian patient is interested in learning about protein complementation. Which of
the following combinations is NOT an example of effective protein complementation?
a. Corn tortillas with refried beans
b. Rice with tofu
c. Squash with legumes
d. Corn with beans

14. Lactose is broken down into which two monosaccharides?
a. Glucose + glucose
b. Fructose + glucose
c. Glucose + galactose
d. Fructose + galactose

15. The average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of 98% of
all healthy people is referred to as the
a. EAR
b. Al
c. RDA
d. DRI

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 62
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Answers)

1. Which of the following is not an example of mechanical digestion?
a. Chewing
b. Swallowing
c. Peristalsis
d. Enzymatic action

Answer: D. Enzymatic action is an example of chemical digestion. Mechanical digestion takes place
(primarily) in the mouth and stomach. Some may argue that peristalsis and segmentation in the small
intestine are also forms of mechanical digestion however by the time food enters the small intestine, it is
already a semi-fluid and the main form of digestion becomes chemical digestion through the use of acid
and enzymes.

2. Your patient is undergoing radiation therapy and you are concerned when you learn they are
taking this supplement.
a. VitaminA
b. Valerian root
c. Red clover
d. Prebiotics

Answer: A. Vitamin A supplements should be avoided in patients undergoing radiation therapy, as it can
increase their skin sensitivity and lead to skin reactions. Valerian root would be concerning in patients
with liver disease or impaired liver function and patients undergoing chemotherapy. Kava and comfrey
can also be hepatotoxic. Red clover, a phytoestrogen, would be concerning in patients with ER+ breast
cancer. Probiotics would be concerning in a patient with a low blood cell count or who is otherwise
immunocompromised. Goldenseal and St Johns Wort art concerning in patients on multiple medications.
Black Cohosh, cranberry, gingko, panax ginseng, milk thistle, saw palmetto, and valerian can inhibit the
cytochrome P450 liver enzymes responsible for drug metabolism in the liver, and may affect how the
body metabolizes different medications.

3. The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 defines dietary supplements as
products that:
a. Contain 22 dietary ingredients or constituents
b. Can be taken by mouth or topically
c. Are labeled as dietary supplements
d. Are intended to reduce the risk of a specific disease

Answer: C. The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 defines dietary supplements as
products that are intended to supplement the diet, contain 2 1 dietary ingredient or their constituents, are
intended to be taken by mouth (pill, capsule, tablet, liquid), are labeled on the front panel as being a
dietary supplement.

4. The omega-3 fatty acids include a-linolenic acid (ALA), found in '
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), found in , and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), found in

Flaxseed and canola oil, fish oil and shellfish, animal fat and fish oil
Fish oil and shellfish, linseed and soybean oil, animal fats and walnuts
Animal fat and fish oil, fish oil and shellfish, flaxseed oil and walnuts
Soybean oil, marine algae, flaxseed oil

aoc

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 63
© 2022 Veritense™

Answer: A. ALA is found in linseed oil, soybean oil, canola oil, flaxseed oil, and walnuts. EPA is found in
marine algae, fish oils, and shellfish. DHA is found in animal fat, fish oils, and shellfish. Because omega-3
fatty acids are key in vision development and brain development, women are often told to supplement
with omega-3 during pregnancy. Omega-6 fatty acids include linoleic acid (LA) and arachidonic acid (AA).
Linoleic acid is found in corn oil, safflower oil, soybean oil, cottonseed oil, sunflower seed oil, and peanut
oil. Arachidonic acid is found in small amounts in meat and eggs.

5. Which of the following statements is NOT true?
a. Chief cells release pepsinogen
b. Gcells secrete gastrin
c. Chief cells release gastric acid
d. Parietal cells release intrinsic factor

Answer: C. G cells in the stomach secrete gastrin which stimulates the release of gastric acid and
intrinsic factor from parietal cells and the release of pepsinogen and gastric lipase from chief cells. Upon
contact with gastric acid, the proenzyme pepsinogen is activated to pepsin.

6. A patient is instructed to take iron supplements. What additional information should you provide
them?
a. Take iron supplements with vitamin C
b. Take iron supplements with a high-fiber snack
c. Avoid taking iron supplements with milk or tea
d. Do not take iron supplements with a meal containing meat

Answer: A. Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) enhances absorption of iron supplements and dietary iron through
the prevention of insoluble iron compounds and the reduction of iron to its absorbable form (which is
ferrous iron, Fe(2+)) Phytates (found in high fiber foods), tannins (found in tea), and calcium can inhibit
iron absorption. Co-intake of non-heme iron with heme-iron (like is found in meat) can increase
absorption. Iron in supplements are typically in ferrous form, while non-heme iron may be ferric iron
(Fe(3+)).

7. Which of the following is true regarding vitamin consumption?
a. Excessive consumption of beta carotene will NOT lead to vitamin A toxicity
b. Excessive consumption of beta carotene WILL lead to vitamin A toxicity
c. Excessive consumption of cholecalciferol will lead to vitamin D toxicity
d. Excessive consumption of ergocalciferol will lead to vitamin D toxicity

Answer: A. Beta carotene is a carotenoid and is converted by the body to active forms of vitamin A —
however, only a small fraction of beta carotene consumed will be converted to active vitamin A. While
excessive consumption of beta carotene can lead to an accumulation of carotenoids in subcutaneous fat
(turning the skin orange), it will not lead to vitamin A toxicity. Excessive consumptions of cholecalciferol
(vitamin D3) or ergocalciferol (vitamin D2) will not lead to vitamin D toxicity because excess vitamin D can
be excreted through bile, or through urine after conversion to water soluble metabolites. Furthermore, if
no more vitamin D is needed or needs to be stored, the body can excrete the provitamins rather than
convert them to calcidiol.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 64
© 2022 Veritense™

8. Which of the following statements is true regarding vitamin K?
a. Menaquinone is the main form of dietary vitamin K
b. Phylloquinone is form of vitamin K produced by gut microbiota
c. Vitamin K is excreted mainly via urine
d. Blood levels of vitamin K are typically low due to a short half-life

Answer: D. Vitamin K has a short-half life, meaning it is rapidly metabolized and excreted, and thus blood
and tissue levels are typically low when measured. Menaquinone (Vitamin k2) is the vitamin K form
produced by gut microbiota in the large intestine while phylloquinone, or vitamin K1, is the main form of
vitamin K in the diet (from green, leafy vegetables. Vitamin K excretion occurs mainly via feces with some
via urine.

9. A patient with osteoporosis is instructed to take calcium supplements. In reviewing their 3-day
food recall, you are concerned that they regularly take their calcium supplement with meals or
snacks containing

a. White bread

b. Spinach
c. Vitamin C
d. Dairy

Answer: B. Phytates and oxalate can inhibit some calcium absorption. Phytates are found in whole
grains and legumes, while foods high in oxalates include spinach, rhubarb, dried beans, and sweet
potatoes. The patient should avoid consuming their calcium supplement with these foods. Answer A is a
low-fiber food. Vitamin C increase iron absorption, and calcium decreases iron absorption — but we aren't
talking about iron in this question. Dairy, which also contains calcium, is OK to consume along with
calcium supplements. Concerns over high calcium intake or high vitamin D intake (resulting in soft tissue
calcification or kidney stones) are typically raised when a patient is taking excessive supplemental levels,
not dietary levels.

10. Phytates do not inhibit the absorption of

a. Zinc

b. Iron

c. Calcium
d. Vitamin C

Answer: D. From this list, phytates inhibit the absorption of zinc, iron, and calcium. For the exam, you
should be familiar with questions such as this one, as well as “[micronutrient] is inhibited by [oxalates,
tannins]”.

11. lron is absorbed by enterocytes in the form and copper is absorbed in the
form.
a. Oxidized, reduced
b. Reduced, oxidized
c. Reduced, reduced
d. Oxidized, oxidized

Answer: C. lron is absorbed in its reduced form (ferrous, Fe(2+)) and copper is absorbed in its reduced
form (cuprous, Cu(1+)). lron’s oxidized form is ferric iron (Fe(3+) and copper’s oxidized form is cupric
(Cu(2+)).

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 65
© 2022 Veritense™

12. Which of the following amino acids is ketogenic only?

a. Lysine

b. Alanine

c. Glutamate
d. Valine

Answer: A. Lysine and leucine are only ketogenic. See Table 6 for which amino acids are glucogenic
only and which are both glucogenic and ketogenic. While protein primary function isn’t to provide energy,
they can do so. Some amino acids are converted directly to glucose (glucogenic) and some are converted
to ketone bodies (ketogenic).

13. A vegetarian patient is interested in learning about protein complementation. Which of the
following combinations is NOT an example of effective protein complementation?
a. Corn tortillas with refried beans
b. Rice with tofu
c. Squash with legumes
d. Corn with beans

Answer: C. Corn should be paired with beans (legumes) (Answer A, D). Grains, including rice, should be
paired with soy (legumes). Vegetables should be paired with grains, nuts, or seeds (not legumes) — both
vegetables and legumes are limited in methionine. Review Table 5 for protein complementation. Note that
protein pairing does not need to occur in the same meal but can be achieved through a varied vegetarian
diet throughout the day.

14. Lactose is broken down into which two monosaccharides?
a. Glucose + glucose
b. Fructose + glucose
c. Glucose + galactose
d. Fructose + galactose

Answer: C. Lactose is broken down by lactase into glucose and galactose. Maltase breaks down maltose
into 2 glucose molecules while sucrase breaks down sucrose into fructose and glucose.

15. The average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of 98% of all healthy
people is referred to as the

a. EAR
b. Al

c. RDA
d. DRI

Answer: C. The recommended dietary allowance (RDA) is the average daily level of intake sufficient to
meet the nutrient requirements of 97-98% of all healthy people and varies by sex, age, and
pregnancy/breastfeeding status. The EAR is the nutrient intake level estimated to meet the needs of 50%
of people of a certain age and sex group and is used to determine the RDA. The adequate intake, or Al,
is set at a level assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy when there is insufficient evidence to develop an
RDA. All of these measures, as well as the AMDR and UL are “DRIs” or dietary reference intakes.

References

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 66
© 2022 Veritense™

' Institute of Medicine. 2006. Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226.11537

2 Fish, J. Are Complementary Proteins Necessary? hittps://muscleandmanna.com/complementary-
proteins-necessary/ Accessed 21 November 2020.

3 American Society for Nutrition Staff. Protein Complementation. American Society for Nutrition:
Community and Public Health Nutrition. 2011. https://nutrition.org/protein-complementation Accessed 21
November 2020.

4 Mann, D. Trans Fats: The Science and the Risks. NOURISH by WebMD.
https://www.webmd.com/diet/features/trans-fats-science-and-risks Accessed 21 November 2020.

5 Gropper SS, Smith JL, and Groff JL. Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism. 2009. Boston,
Massachusetts: Cengage Learning. 5" ed. Print. Page 125.

® Webb, D. Phytochemical’s Role in Good Health. 2013 September. Today’s Dietitian. 15:9 (70). Web.
https://www.todaysdietitian.com/newarchives/090313p70.shtm! Accessed 21 November 2020.

7 Pesticide residues in food. World Health Organization. Published 19 February 2018. Accessed 21
November 2020.

8 Chemicals in Meat Cooked at High Temperatures and Cancer Risk. National Cancer Institute. Reviewed
11 July 2017. https:/Avww.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/diet/cooked-meats-fact-sheet
Accessed 21 November 2020.

® Dhakal A, Sbar E. Aflatoxin Toxicity. [Updated 2020 May 31]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island
(FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 Jan. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/books/NBK557781/
10 Campbell, D. On Eating Raw Mushrooms. MykoWeb: Mushrooms, Fungi, and Mycology.
http://www.mykoweb.com/articles/EatingRawMushrooms.htm! Accessed 21 November 2020.

1! Dolan LC, Matulka RA, Burdock GA. Naturally occurring food toxins. Toxins (Basel). 2010;2(9):2289-
2332. doi:10.3390/toxins2092289 PMCID: PMC3153292

12 Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health, “Botanical Dietary Supplements’.
https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/BotanicalBackground-HealthProfessional/. Accessed 3 June 2020.

13 Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health, “Botanical Dietary Supplements’.
https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/BotanicalBackground-HealthProfessional/. Accessed 3 June 2020.

Normal Nutrition, Digestion, and Absorption 67
