KIDNEY FUNCTION,
ELECTROLYTES & DEHYDRATION

- )'
HAG

FOR THE REGISTERED DIETITIAN NUTRITIONIST EXAMINATION

a VERITENSE™ product

WRITTEN BY
Bailey DeBarmore, PhD MHS RDN LDN
Creator of the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™

Version: June 1, 2022
© 2022 Veritense™

Table of Contents

TOIrMS Of USC 0.0... eeeceeccceceeeeeeeenneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeuaaeeeeeeeeeseeeeseaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeseneceaaeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeneeees 2
Electrolytes and Fluid CompartmenttS..............:::ccccessessseseesesseseessesseeeeeeeseeseeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeees 3
Dehydration ..........ee cece cceceeceeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeuaaaeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeneeaaeeeeeeseeeeeeneeea 5
Fluid N@@dS ............ccc cece cceeceeeceeeeeseeeseeseeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseees 6
Study Guide QueSTIONS ............eecceeeeeeeceteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneaaeeeeeeeaeeeeeeseeeaeeeseeenaeeeeeeneeeaeeeeeeea 6
Study Guide Questions (ANSWETS)............:::cccceeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeneees 7
Kidney FUNCtIONS............ cece cece eceeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeseeeseneeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeea 7
Volume and Osmolarity Regulation ............. cece eee eeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeea 7
Low extracellular fluid leVelS .0.......... cee ce cece ccceeee cece eeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesees 7
High extracellular fluid leVeIS 0.0.0.0... eee cece cece cece ee eeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneea 8

lon Concentration and PH Regulation..............cccccceceeesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseaeeeeeensnaeeees 8
lon Concentration ............cccccceeccce eee eeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaeeeeseeeesseenseaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeaees 8

DH Regulation... eee e cece ceeceneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeneeea 8
Waste and Toxin Excretion............cccccccceceeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeaaeeeeeeeeeees 11
Hormone Production ............cccccccccccecceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 12
Practice QUESTIONS 00... cece ccc cceeeeee eee e ee eeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeeeeeeeeeesey 14
Practice Questions (ANSWETS) ...........:cccccccccceseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaseeeeeeeeeses 16
REPEFENCES 2.2... cece eccecceteeee eee eeeeeeeeenaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeneuaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeecaaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeeeeeney 18

Terms of use

Bailey DeBarmore is the creator and sole owner of the exclusive copyright to this study
resource.

This publication may not be shared physically or electronically with anyone, manipulated,
copied, reprinted and sold, altered, or reproduced in any form or by any means without
requesting further permission from the owner, Bailey DeBarmore.

This book is for personal use only by a single individual. It should not be distributed to a dietetic
internship class or otherwise used for academic purposes without discussing terms of use with
the owner. By purchasing this item, you agree to the Terms of Use outlined herein.

To inquire about further permissions for this document, including access for groups such as
dietetic internship classes or graduate courses, contact the owner to learn about your options.

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 2
© 2022 Veritense™

Electrolytes and Fluid Compartments

Section References unless otherwise indicated
e Body Fluids. Boundless Anatomy and Physiology. Lumen Learning.

https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-ap/chapter/body-fluids/
e Electrolyte Balance. Boundless Anatomy and Physiology. Lumen Learning.
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-ap/chapter/electrolyte-balance/

This section will describe the basic processes of how fluid moves within our body and the
implications for fluid balance. Knowledge of these concepts is important to understand volume
regulation by the kidneys. First, we will start with some basic terms.

Extracellular fluid (ECF) is the fluid in ECF

interstitial fluid

blood vessels and the interstitial fluid. |
Intracellular fluid (ICF) is the fluid
within cells. blood

vessel
In the resting state, sodium (Na+),

calcium (Ca?*), and chloride (Cl-) reside
primarily in the ECF.

In contrast, potassium (K+) and
phosphate (PO,*) reside in the ICF in
the resting state.

Chloride moves from Sodium follows ion t ion concentration in t intracellular pressure
ECF into cells gradient created by cells leads to opens cellular ports.
chloride movement. intracellular pressure lons exit into ECF to

maintain homeostasis.

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 3
© 2022 Veritense™

Water follows by
osmosis.

Tonicity is the ability of a solution on one side of the cell membrane to attract water from
solution on the other side of the cell membrane. In clinical scenarios, tonicity refers to osmolality
of a solution relative to human plasma. The tonicity of a fluid depends on the amount of
osmotically active solutes and tonicity of ECF is determined primarily by sodium levels

Osmolality is the amount of osmotically active substances in a solution expressed as
milliosmoles per liter of water (mOsm/L). Osmotically active substances increase the tonicity of
solutions and cause osmosis. The main osmotically active substance in ECF is sodium.

Osmosis is the movement of water from a lower tonicity solution to a higher tonicity solution
through a semipermeable or permeable membrane. Osmosis maintains homeostasis, or
equilibrium, because it evens out the ratio of fluid and solute between the intracellular and
extracellular compartments.

Isotonic Hypotonic Hypertonic
~ 300 mOsm/L < 300 mOsm/L > 300 mOsm/L
Intracellular and extracellular Concentration of solutes is Concentration of solutes is
solutions have the same lower outside the cells than in greater outside the cell than
ability to attract water. the ICF. Water will move into — in ICF. Fluid will move out of
Concentration of solutes is the cell via osmosis and lead __ the cell into ECF, increasing
balanced to lysis interstitial fluid volume and/or

blood volume and leading to
shriveled cells

Fill out the corresponding worksheet in the Kidney, Electrolyte and Dehydration freebie
| packet.

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 4
© 2022 Veritense™

Dehydration

There are 3 types of dehydration: isotonic, hypotonic, and hypertonic.' Brainstorm scenarios for
each type of dehydration, including possible disease states, lab values, and treatments.

Isotonic / lsonatremic / Hypovolemic Dehydration

Description Possible Causes

* Loss of water and electrolytes in

. * Excessive sweatin
proportion to plasma levels g

* Repeated vomiting
* Diarrhea
* Severe bleeding

Sodium: WNL 130-150 mmol/L Most common type of dehydration

BUN: WNL 7-20 mg/dL

Hypotonic / Hyponatremic Dehydration

Description Possible Causes

Primarily loss of electrolytes, Treating dehydration with electrolyte-poor
especially sodium fluids
Intravascular water shifts to Diarrhea
ECF GI obstruction, fistula, or ileus
Results in hypotonic plasma, Heat exhaustion
water shifts from ECF to ICF Pancreatitis
leading to swelling Burns
Trauma
Ketonuria
Chronic malnutrition
Cystic fibrosis with excessive salt loss in
Sodium: low <130 mmol/L sweat
Renal tubular acidosis
Diuretics (thiazides, furosemide, mannitol)

Clinical Signs

Excessive sweating can lead to isotonic and hypertonic dehydration.

Why does sweating lead to hypertonic but not hypotonic dehydration?

Diarrhea can cause all 3 types of dehydration and result in hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia,
and hypokalemia. Hypokalemia can also occur from vomiting. Hyperkalemia can be a result of
dehydration. Note that hypernatremia is a result of dehydration, while hyponatremia is a result of
treating dehydration with insufficient sodium-containing fluid.

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 5
© 2022 Veritense™

Hypertonic / Hypernatremic Dehydration

Description Possible Causes

* Primarily loss of water Water deprivation
* Can lead to osmotic cerebral Diarrhea (esp. in peds)
edema with rapid rehydration Excessive sweating

Hyperventilation

Unmanaged diabetes with ketoacidosis and
polyuria

Heat stroke

End-stage renal failure

Infusion of hypertonic solutions

Some diuretics

Clinical Signs

Sodium: high >150 mmol/L
BUN: high >20 mg/dL

Fluid Needs

Total body water makes up about 60% of male body weight and 55% of female body weight but
is lower for obese and elderly persons.” The majority of total body water is intracellular (60%)
versus extracellular (40%). Of the extracellular fluid, 20% is plasma volume and 80% is
interstitial fluid. To estimate fluid needs, we can use 30 — 35 mL/kg knowing that it will
overestimate fluid needs for a larger person and underestimate fluid needs for a smaller
person.’ You can also use 100 mL/kg for the first 10 kg body weight, 50 mL/kg for the next 10
kg, and 20 mL/kg for the remaining body weight. Normal saline contains only sodium and
chloride. Lactated Ringers contain sodium, chloride, bicarbonate, and calcium.

Study Guide Questions

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your first pass at
applying the knowledge you’ve read and practiced in example calculations in a question-and-answer
format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your notes.

1. Describe tonicity in 2 different ways.

2. Higher calorie enteral formulas are hypertonic. What does hypertonic mean in this
situation?

3. Hypertonic enteral formulas can lead to GI symptoms and distress. Describe these
symptoms and why they occur.

4. Describe the 3 types of dehydration. Connect the name with the loss of electrolytes
versus the loss of water.

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 6
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions (Answers)

1. Describe tonicity in 2 different ways

e The ability of a solution to attract water across a membrane.

e The concentration of solutes on one side of a membrane relative to the other side.

2. Higher calorie enteral formulas are hypertonic. What does hypertonic mean in this situation?

e Hypertonic enteral formulas have osmolarity higher than plasma (> 300 mOsm/L).

3. Hypertonic enteral formulas can lead to GI symptoms and distress. Describe these
symptoms and why they occur.

e Hypertonic enteral formulas can cause water to enter the intestinal lumen because
the higher concentration of solutes results in water diffusing in. This leads to watery
diarrhea, cramping, and other abdominal symptoms.

4. Describe the 3 types of dehydration. Connect the name with the loss of electrolytes versus
the loss of water.

e /sotonic dehydration occurs with equal loss of fluid and electrolytes. Serum sodium
and BUN will be WNL.

e Hypotonic dehydration occurs with loss of electrolytes, leading to hypotonic plasma.
Serum sodium will be low (<130 mmol/L).

e Hypertonic dehydration occurs with loss of fluids, leading to hypertonic plasma.
Serum sodium will be high (>150 mmol/L) and serum BUN will be high (>20 mmol/L).

Kidney Functions

The kidneys have 4 key functions: volume and osmolarity regulation, ion
concentration and pH regulation, waste and toxin excretion, and hormone
production.’

Volume and Osmolarity Regulation

Section Reference unless otherwise indicated

e Water Balance. Anatomy & Physiology. Oregon State University.
https://open.oregonstate.education/aandp/chapter/26-2-water-balance/

The kidneys are responsible for making sure we have adequate plasma volume, which is key to
keep blood flowing to our organs. The kidneys also regulate the osmolarity of our extracellular
fluid by either concentrating or diluting our urine.

Low extracellular fluid levels

When extracellular fluid (ECF) volume is low, plasma solute concentration increases, which
increases osmolarity. In response to an increased solute concentration, the kidneys reabsorb
water in order to increase the ECF volume, which decreases the plasma solute concentration
and restores normal osmolarity. The result of the kidneys reabsorbing water is concentrated
urine. We might see low ECF levels due to dehydration or increased fluid losses from fever

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 7
© 2022 Veritense™

and/or Gl fluids. Signs include an elevated BUN, poor skin elasticity, dry mucous membranes,
and orthostatic hypotension.

High extracellular fluid levels

When ECF volume is high, plasma solute concentration decreases, which decreases
osmolarity. In response to decreased solute concentration, the kidney excretes excess water,
which reduces ECF volume, restores solute concentration and osmolarity to normal, and results
in diluted urine as water is excreted into the collecting duct. We might see ECF volume excess
in patients with heart failure, renal failure, or liver failure (particularly cirrhosis with ascites).
Signs include edema (peripheral, sacral, or pulmonary) and anasarca (extreme generalized
edema).

All the jars to the right have the same number of solutes
with varying levels of ECF volume (normal, low, excess).
See how the same amount of solutes in different ECF
volumes results in higher or lower concentrations and
thus, osmolarity.

Normal ECF Low ECF Excess ECF
volume volume volume

lon Concentration and pH Regulation

Section References unless otherwise indicated

e Koeppen BM. The Kidney and Acid-Base Regulation. Advances in Physiology
Education. 2009. 33(4). https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00054.2009

e Acid-Base Balance. Boundless Anatomy and Physiology. Lumen Learning.
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-ap/chapter/acid-base-balance/

Just like the kidneys regulate plasma volume by excreting or reabsorbing water, they can
regulate ion concentration and pH levels by excreting or reabsorbing electrolytes, hydrogen, and
bicarbonate ions.

lon Concentration

The kidneys primarily regulate ion concentration by reabsorbing or excreting sodium, potassium,
and calcium to maintain relatively constant levels of electrolytes. When electrolyte plasma levels
are too high, the kidneys will remove them from circulation and excrete them in the urine. If
electrolyte plasma levels are too low, the kidneys will retain them from the circulating blood
instead of excreting them.

pH Regulation

Both the kidneys and the lungs play a role in maintaining blood acid-base balance. The
respiratory system compensates for short term disruption of acid-base balance by changing
ventilation patterns. The kidneys are slower to respond to acid-base imbalance but have a
larger effect by excreting excess acid (H+) in the urine or reabsorbing bicarbonate (HCO;)) to
keep in the blood. Bicarbonate does not have a transporter so reabsorption and excretion occur

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 8
© 2022 Veritense™

via reactions controlled by renal epithelial cells. Buffers, like NHs, absorb the excess H+ and
OH- to maintain pH. This section should have you thinking about metabolic alkalosis/acidosis
versus respiratory alkalosis/acidosis.

To increase acidity, acids dissociate into H+ and lower the pH
To increase alkalinity: bases dissociate into OH- and increase pH

Secrete Excrete Reabsorb
from renal cells to filtration from blood to filtration fluid from filtration fluid or urine
fluid to blood to urine to blood

Acid-Base Balance

Normal blood gas values can be reported for arterial Normal ABG value
blood (ABGs) or mixed venous blood. pH 7.35 — 7.45

PCO2 35 — 45

HCO3- 22 - 26

Acidemia is when blood pH is less than 7.35 and alkalemia is when pH is greater than 7.45.
Remember that higher pH values indicate basic and lower pH values indicate acidic. Acidemia
and alkalemia refer to abnormal pH while acidosis and alkalosis refer to the metabolic or
respiratory process whose compensatory response led to the abnormal pH values. For the RD
exam, you don’t need to know acid-base balance in depth. This section is meant to give you
enough background information to understand the concepts you need to know, rather than brute
memorizing it. If you go on to take the nutrition support credentialing exam, you will need to
understand the details behind the why, as well as appropriate treatments.

Respiratory acidosis can occur from pulmonary issues, such as COPD exacerbation, asthma,
pneumonia, pulmonary edema, respiratory muscle weakness (e.g. ALS), or from CNS
depression (e.g. head trauma, drug toxicity, post-ictal state). The pH will be low and PCO2 will
be high. As the body compensates, we will see elevated HCO3- and H2CO3 levels because the
lungs are hypoventilating in order to retain CO2.

Respiratory alkalosis can occur due to pain, anxiety, panic attacks, pregnancy, hypoxemia,
drug toxicity, hyperventilation, or pulmonary disease. The pH will be high and PCO2 will be low.
As the body compensates, we see decreased HCO3- and H2CO3 because the body is
increasing the respiratory rate (hyperventilation) to wash out excess CO2.

Metabolic acidosis can be “high anion gap” or “normal anion gap”. High anion gap metabolic
acidosis can occur due to lactic acidosis (e.g. metformin use, liver failure, infection, ischemia),
ketoacidosis, salicylate use, renal insufficiency, excess iron intake, accumulation of exogenous
organic acids (e.g. methanol or paraldehyde poisoning), uremia (e.g. rhabdomyolysis). Normal
anion gap metabolic acidosis can occur due to renal tubular acidosis, GI loss of HCO3- from
diarrhea, fistulas or intestinal stomas, hyperchloremia (e.g. from excess saline or PN), Addison’s
disease (e.g. aldosterone deficiency), or from use of some drugs like spironolactone. In both
cases of metabolic acidosis, we will see low pH and low HCO3- levels. The body compensates
by lowering PCO2 production.

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 9
© 2022 Veritense™

Anion gap is calculated from the difference between the major positive and negative ions in the
blood (sodium, potassium, chloride, and bicarbonate). You don’t need to know how to calculate
anion gap.

Metabolic alkalosis can be “chloride-responsive’” with normal urinary chloride levels or
“chloride-resistant” with urinary chloride in excess of 40 mmol/L. They are also called saline-
responsive and saline-resistant (saline contains chloride). Chloride-responsive metabolic
alkalosis can occur from vomiting, excessive nasogastric suctioning, hypovolemia, or types of
diuretics (loop, thiazide). Chloride-resistant metabolic alkalosis can occur in several syndromes
including hyperaldosteronism, Cushing’s, Bartter (excess mineralocorticoids), very low serum
potassium, or excess alkali intake. In both cases of metabolic alkalosis, HCO3- will be high and
the body compensates by increasing PCO2.

For a straightforward question on acid-base balance, evaluate first the pH (is it low or high),
then look at PCO2 (high or low?), and then finally look at HCO3 (high or low?). For simple acid-
base disorders, either PCO2 or HCO3 will be abnormal and can point you to respiratory versus
metabolic as the primary etiology of pH imbalance. In real life, acid-base disorders can be a mix,

which is trickier to ascertain.

pH < 7.35 pH > 7.45
Acidemia Alkalemia
High Low Low High

Respiratory Metabolic Respiratory Metabolic
acidosis acidosis alkalosis alkalosis

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 10
© 2022 Veritense™

How do the kidneys respond to acidosis and alkalosis?

When the blood is too acidic (low pH) the When the blood is too basic (high pH) the
kidneys will: kidneys will:
e increase bicarbonate reabsorption e decrease hydrogen ion secretion from
e increase hydrogen ion secretion from renal epithelial cells
renal epithelial cells e decrease rates of glutamine
e increase ammonia secretion to metabolism
increase the NHsg buffer e decrease rates of ammonium

excretion (NH)

Find blood on the pH scale below — it stays normal between pH of 7.35 and 7.45.

Lemon Black Saliva Baking Bleach

Gastric Tomato Urine —_ Blood Milk of
acid juice magnesia

Waste and Toxin Excretion

Section References unless otherwise indicated

e Le Vay D, Mitchell GAG, and Robson JS. Renal System. 2020.

https://www.britannica.com/science/human-renal-system

The kidneys are responsible for filtering water-soluble substances from our blood into urine for
excretion.° These water-soluble substances include some vitamins, environmental toxins, and
metabolic waste products.

Name vitamins that would be excreted by the kidneys when consumed in excess. Which
vitamins would not? Why not?

Protein catabolism produces urea as a waste product. When urea builds up in the blood, it
leads to feelings of malaise. CKD diets have limited protein to minimize urea build up since the
kidneys don’t function well enough to excrete the excess urea. In ESRD, urea and other
substances build up in-between dialysis sessions.

Water-soluble vitamins, when consumed in excess of what the body needs, are excreted in
the urine. Excess vitamin supplementation can even change the color of the urine. B vitamins
and vitamin C are water soluble.

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 11
© 2022 Veritense™

Drugs, like antibiotics and B blockers among others, are also excreted by the kidneys.
Clinicians have to be careful with medications and dosages in patients with CKD or ESRD
because impaired kidney function means the drugs will stay in the blood longer, rather than be
excreted. Any procedure using contrast also increases the risk of acute kidney injury (AKI)
because the contrast is metabolized by the kidneys.

Environmental toxins produce urinary markers, such as cotinine and phlalates, that indicate
environmental exposure. For example, NHANES quantifies exposure to secondhand smoke by
measuring urinary cotinine.

Clinicians can run several tests on urine for a better sense of what is going on inside the body.
Specific gravity or the presence of albumin, white blood cells, red blood cells, or other urinary
constituents are informative. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is a marker of renal clearance and
is estimated from the amount of excreted creatinine in the urine after taking other parameters
into consideration.

Fill out the worksheet in the Kidney, Electrolyte, and Dehydration freebie packet that asks you to

write examples of how waste and toxin excretion manifests in signs and symptoms.

Hormone Production

Section Reference unless otherwise indicated:
e Fontana J and Mad’a P. Endocrine Functions of the Kidneys. Functions of Cells and Human
Body: Multimedia Textbook. https://bit.ly/ZoLQ78W
e Sahay M, Kalra S, and Bandgar T. Renal endocrinology: The new frontier. Indian J Endocrinol
Metab. 2012. 16(2):154-155. https://Awww.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/pme/articles/PMC3313729

In addition to the key functions discussed so far, our kidneys also produce and metabolize
hormones. The kidneys produce erythropoietin, which stimulates red blood cell synthesis; renin,
which is key in maintaining blood pressure; and calcitriol, which is part of the vitamin D
metabolic cycle.° The kidneys also degrade insulin and parathyroid hormone to inactive
compounds in the blood. Fill out the 3 and 4" worksheets in the packet as you go through this
section.

Erythropoietin (EPO) targets bone marrow and stimulates RBC synthesis to improve tissue
oxygenation.

Insufficient EPO © =
Tissue -——> —_ _
Oxidation RBC ©
synthesis

bone marrow

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 12
© 2022 Veritense™

If the kidneys aren’t working, and thus aren’t producing sufficient EPO, what would happen?
How does this connect to common issues and treatments in CKD and ESRD patients?

Renin controls salt and water balance, and thus blood pressure. In response to low mean
arterial blood pressure (MAP), the kidneys release renin, which cleaves angiotensinogen (from
the liver) to angiotensin |. Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) converts angiotensin | to
angiotensin II, which constricts blood vessels and stimulates increased blood pressure via other
mechanisms.

Angiotensin | \

Low Blood Renin Increased
Pressure -——> —> “> Blood
Pressure

Angiotensinogen
Calcitriol (1,25-D3) circulates as a hormone regulating calcium and phosphate metabolism, and
is the active form of vitamin D. Vitamin D can be generated from cholecalciferol (sun) which
goes to the liver and then travels to the kidney as calcidiol (25-hydroxy D3). Vitamin D can also
be generated from cholecalciferol (D3; from food) or ergocalciferol (D2; from supplements)
which then go to the liver and the kidney.

Cholecalciferol | Cholecalciferol (Ds) _|

(food)

[ Ergocalciferol(D.) | (D,)
(supplements) «

7-dehydrocholesterol

Cholecalcifero! (D3) >

Measured in blood test

Calcidiol
(25-hydroxyvitamin D3)

Calcitriol
(1,25-
dihydroxyvitamin D, )

Fill out the last worksheet in the Kidney, Electrolyte and Dehydration packet that asks “what do
the kidneys do?”, “why do the kidneys do it’, and “what happens when things go wrong?”

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 13
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions

Answer these practice questions using the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™ that you read about in
Chapter 2 and 3 of the Study Smarter Method for the RD-Exam section. Instead of answering these
questions using your memory and logic, use the study guide text and/or your own research to determine
which answer is correct (and why), and why the other answers are incorrect. Pay attention to the question
itself, and be sure you know what the question is asking. There are answers with explanations following.
If this is your first set of practice questions, go back and skim Chapters 2 and 3 in the Study Smarter
Method for the RD-Exam section to remind yourself of the types of questions and how to answer them.

1.

Which of the following electrolytes resides primarily in the extracellular fluid in the resting

state?
a.

b.
c.
d.

Sodium
Potassium
Phosphate

None of the above

The tonicity of a fluid depends on the amount of solutes present.

a.
b.
c.
d.

Osmotically inactive
Osmotically active
Hypertonic
Hypotonic

Which electrolyte is the primary determinant of extracellular fluid tonicity?

a.
b.
c.
d.

Chloride
Phosphate
Sodium
Potassium

Which type of dehydration is characterized by high BUN levels?

a.

b.
c.
d.

Hypertonic dehydration
Isotonic dehydration
Hypovolemic dehydration
Hypotonic dehydration

Diarrhea can lead to dehydration as well as:

a.

b.
c.
d

Hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypokalemia
Hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia
Hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperkalemia
Hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypokalemia

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 14
© 2022 Veritense™

. A patient with diabetes in ketoacidosis would likely present with dehydration
while a patient with cystic fibrosis would likely present with dehydration.
a. Hyponatremic, hypernatremic
b. Hypertonic, hypotonic
c. Hypotonic, hypertonic
d. Isotonic, hypotonic

. What is an appropriate fluid intake recommendation for a healthy adult who weighs 100
kg?

2900 mL/day

3800 mL/day

3100 mL/day

2000 mL/day

2909

How do the kidneys respond when a human's blood pH is 7.2?
a. Increase bicarbonate reabsorption
b. Decrease ammonium excretion
c. Decrease hydrogen ion secretion
d. Decrease glutamine metabolism

. Which of the following molecules is produced by the kidney to control blood pressure?
a. Calcitriol

b. Erythropoietin

c. Renin

d. Angiotensinogen

10. Which of the following would not be filtered and excreted by the kidneys?

a. Vitamin K
b. Thiamin
c. Vitamin C
d. Urea

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 15
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Answers)

1. Which of the following electrolytes resides primarily in the extracellular fluid in the resting state?
a. Sodium
b. Potassium
c. Phosphate
d. None of the above

Answer: A. Sodium, calcium, and chloride reside primarily in the extracellular fluid (ECF) in the resting
state, while potassium and phosphate reside primarily in the intracellular fluid (ICF) at resting state.

2. The tonicity of a fluid depends on the amount of solutes present.
a. Osmotically inactive
b. Osmotically active
c. Hypertonic
d. Hypotonic

Answer: B. The tonicity of a fluid depends on the amount of osmotically active solutes. Tonicity is the
ability of a solution on one side of the cell membrane to attract water from solution on the other side of the
cell membrane. In clinical scenarios, tonicity refers to osmolality of a solution relative to human plasma. A
solute itself is not hypertonic or hypotonic, rather the tonicity of a fluid can be classified as hypertonic or
hypotonic relative to another substance.

3. Which electrolyte is the primary determinant of extracellular fluid tonicity?

a. Chloride

b. Phosphate
c. Sodium

d. Potassium

Answer: C. The tonicity of extracellular fluid (ECF) is determined primarily by sodium levels. In other
words, sodium is the main osmotically active substance in the ECF. Other electrolytes that reside
primarily in the ECF at resting state include chloride and calcium.

4. Which type of dehydration is characterized by high BUN levels?
a. Hypertonic dehydration
b. Isotonic dehydration
c. Hypovolemic dehydration
d. Hypotonic dehydration

Answer: A. Hypertonic dehydration, or hypernatremic dehydration, is characterized by high sodium and
high BUN lab levels. It is primarily a loss of water and can lead to osmotic cerebral edema with rapid
rehydration. Isotonic dehydration (also called isonatremic or hypovolemic dehydration) is characterized
by WNL sodium and BUN levels and is a loss of water and electrolytes in proportion to plasma levels.
Hypotonic or hyponatremic dehydration is characterized by low sodium levels and is primarily a loss of
electrolytes as intravascular water shifts to the ECF resulting in hypotonic plasma (which can result in
swelling). Review the possible causes of each type of dehydration in the study guide.

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 16
© 2022 Veritense™

5. Diarrhea can lead to dehydration as well as:
a. Hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypokalemia
b. Hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia
c. Hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperkalemia
d. Hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypokalemia

Answer: D. Diarrhea can lead to all 3 types of dehydration as well as result in low calcium, high
phosphate, and low potassium. Low potassium can also occur if the patient is vomiting. Dehydration
can then lead to high potassium due to fluid shifts. Review which electrolytes reside in ECF and ICF in
resting state, and how they move with the different dehydration types.

6. A patient with diabetes in ketoacidosis would likely present with dehydration while a
patient with cystic fibrosis would likely present with dehydration.
a. Hyponatremic, hypernatremic
b. Hypertonic, hypotonic
c. Hypotonic, hypertonic
d. lsotonic, hypotonic

Answer: B. A patient with unmanaged diabetes who presents in ketoacidosis may also present with
hypertonic (also called hypernatremic) dehydration. A patient with cystic fibrosis who presents with
dehydration may present with hypotonic (or hyponatremic) dehydration if they have excessive salt loss
in their sweat. Answer A and answer C are essentially the same answer, using different terms. Isotonic
dehydration is the most common type of dehydration and can be caused by excessive sweating, repeated
vomiting, diarrhea, or severe bleeding.

7. What is an appropriate fluid intake recommendation for a healthy adult who weighs 100 kg?
a. 2900 mL/day
b. 3800 mL/day
c. 3100 mL/day
d. 2000 mL/day

Answer: C. whether you estimate fluid needs with 30 — 35 mL/day (3000 — 3500 mL/day for this patient)
or using the stepwise approach [100 mL/kg for the first 10 kg body weight, 50 mL/kg for the next 10 kg,
and 20 mL/kg for the remaining body weight] (3100 mL/day) you would arrive at the correct answer. The
other estimates would be outside the range of 30 — 35 mL/day.

8. How do the kidneys respond when a human’s blood pH is 7.2?
a. Increase bicarbonate reabsorption
b. Decrease ammonium excretion
c. Decrease hydrogen ion secretion
d. Decrease glutamine metabolism

Answer: A. Normal blood pH is between 7.35 and 7.45. A pH of 7.2 is acidic. When the blood is too
acidic (low pH) the kidneys will increase bicarbonate reabsorption, increase hydrogen ion secretion from
renal epithelial cells, and increase ammonia secretion to increase the NHs buffer. When the blood is too
basic (high pH) the kidneys will decrease hydrogen ion secretion from renal epithelial cells, decrease
rates of glutamine metabolism, decrease rates of ammonium excretion (NH).

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 17
© 2022 Veritense™

9. Which of the following molecules is produced by the kidney to control blood pressure?

a. Calcitriol
b. Erythropoietin
c. Renin

d. Angiotensinogen

Answer: C. the kidney produces the enzyme renin, which cleaves the liver protein angiotensinogen into
angiotensin |. Angiotensin | is converted by angiotensin converting enzyme to angiotensin II, which acts
on blood vessels to constrict them and increase blood pressure, in addition to actin gin other ways.
Calcitriol and erythropoietin are hormones produces by the kidney. Review their function in the study
guide.

10. Which of the following would not be filtered and excreted by the kidneys?
a. Vitamin K
b. Thiamin
c. Vitamin C
d. Urea

Answer: A. The kidneys filter and excrete water-soluble molecules, including urea from protein
catabolism, water-soluble vitamins, water-soluble drugs and drug byproducts, and water-soluble
environmental toxins, such as cotinine and phlalates. Vitamin K (along with A, D, and E) are fat-soluble
vitamins.

References

1 Taylor K, Jones EB. Adult Dehydration. [Updated 2020 Apr 22]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island
(FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 Jan-. Available from: https:/Avww.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/books/NBK555956/
2 Sanders, LR. Water Metabolism. Endocrine Secrets. 6" ed. 2013. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4557-
4975-1.00033-4.

3 Adult Enteral and Parental Nutrition Handbook. Department of Nutrition Services. University of Virginia
Health System. 2011. http:/Awww.healthsystem.virginia.edu/pub/dietitian/nutrition_manual/adult-enteral-
parental-nutrition-handbook

4 Kidneys. Department of Molecular and Cell Biology. University of California, Berkeley.
http://mcb.berkeley.edu/courses/mcb135e/kidneys.html

5 Le Vay D, Mitchell GAG, and Robson JS. Renal System. 2020.

https://www.britannica.com/science/human-renal-system

Kidney Function, Electrolytes, and Dehydration 18
