CALCULATIONS & FORMULAS

- i!
tri

FOR THE REGISTERED DIETITIAN NUTRITIONIST EXAMINATION

a VERITENSE™ product

WRITTEN BY
Bailey DeBarmore, PhD MHS RDN LDN
Creator of the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™

Version: Jan 1, 2023

© 2022 Veritense™

Terms of use

Bailey DeBarmore is the creator and sole owner of the exclusive copyright to this study resource.

This publication may not be shared physically or electronically with anyone, manipulated, copied,
reprinted and sold, altered, or reproduced in any form or by any means without requesting further
permission from the owner, Bailey DeBarmore.

This book is for personal use only by a single individual. It should not be distributed to a dietetic internship
class or otherwise used for academic purposes without discussing terms of use with the owner. By
purchasing this item, you agree to the Terms of Use outlined herein.

To inquire about further permissions for this document, including access for groups such as dietetic
internship classes or graduate courses, contact the owner to learn about your options.

At the end of the study guide you will find answers to the practice questions contained in
the sections with explanations and calculations and you will find a list of study guide

questions. There are no answers provided for the study guide questions — all the
information required to answer them is in the document itself.

Table of Contents

TOrMS Of USC... cceceecceeeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeaeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeneaeeeseeeseeeeeeeaeees 2
Basic Math ReVi0W .........ccccccceccceecsceseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeeeeeeeseeeseeeaeeeseceeeeeesseeseeeseceeeeeeeeseeeeseeneeee 3
Rearranging formulas..........ccccccccecceeceeceeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeneeeseees 3
Multiplying versus dividing by percentages. ............ccccccceeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeneaeees 4
CONVETSIONS 0... eeeeececce eee ecccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeseeeseceeeeeeeeeaeeeeeees 4
SCOOP SiZC oe. cece cece ee ceececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceaeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeseeeeesaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeneea 7
CAN SIZO oie e cece ceecc ccc cccee ee eeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeaaeeeeeceaaeeeeseeeaeaeeeseceeeeseeeaeeeesenaeeeeseseeeeeeeeneueaeess 8
Finance Concepts ...........:ccccecceccccceeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeseeeaaeeeeeeseaeeeeeseeeeeeeenea 10
Budget TyPes.........ccccccccceceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeaaeeaaeeaaeeaaeaeaaeesaeeaseeaeuaaaeaaauaaenaaaaeeaaaaaaea 10
FINANCE RatiOS 0.0.0.2... eee cece cess eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeseeeeeeceeeeeaeeeeeeeseeeeececeeeeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeneeaees 11
Balance Sheets ...........ccccccccceeccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseneeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeceaaeeeeeeeaeeesseeeeeeeseeeneeeeeeeneeeeeeee 13
Cost-Benefit AnalySis ..........ccceccccceeceeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeseseeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeenseeaees 15
Value AnallySis ........cccccccceccecceeccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeceeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeueeeeeeeeeeeseeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeees 15
Value-Added ReSe€arch ..........cccccceecceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeees 16
Break-Even Point ............ccecccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeee 17
Full-Time Equivalent..........0.....ccccccecesseeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesseeeeeeaeeeeeeesseaeaeeueeeeeeeeaaea 20
Finance And FOOCSEIVICE ............ccceceeeeceeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeaeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeseeeseeeseceeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeees 21
Monthly Food Cost .........cccccceeccceceeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeaeeeseeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeseneeeeeeee 21

Calculations and Formulas 2
© 2022 Veritense™

LOT 0S) a 0] = <1 | ee eres 22
FOPOCASTING «0... eeceecccceeceeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeseeeseeceeeeeaeeeeeeeseeeseceeeueeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeseeeseeeseeeeneeeees 24
SIZING UP FECIPOS...... eee eee eeeee ec ceceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneaeeeeeenaaeeeeseneaeeeseeeeueeeseeeaeeeeseeeaueeeeeeneeeeeseneeeeeees 26
Make-or-Buy DeCiSION ............ccccccceeeeeeeeeceneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneaeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeenees 27
Cost-0f-Goods Sold... cece cee cceeeeeeeeneeeeeeeneeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeseeeeeeeesseeeaeeeaseneeeeeeseneeeeees 27
D@PreCiation 0... cccccccccccececcseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeseeeeeeeseeeeeceeeeeeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeseeeeeeaees 28
Tips for Calculation QueSTtIONS.............cec cece cccceeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeseaaeeeeeeneueeeseeeeeaeeeeeenaeeeseeaaes 29
Edible Portion and Yield ...........cccccccccccecsseeeeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeseeeseeeeeceeeueseeseeeseeesseeeseeeseeeaeeeseeeeeeeaees 29
Practice Calculations.............ccccccccceecccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeneaeeeeseneeeeeseseneeeeeeeee 36
SelING Price oo... eee cece eee eeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeneaeeeseeeeaeeeseeeeeeeeseeeaaeeeeseeeeeeeeenneeeees 37
Practice Calculations..............ccccccccccceeeeceeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeaeeeseeeeaeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeeseeeee 40
Calculating Profitability and Popularity 0.0.0... ccc ccceee cece eeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeenees 41
Practice Calculation ANSWETS............::::ccccceeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeseeeeaeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseneeeeeeeeneeeeeeees 45
Study Guide Questions 0.0.2.2... cece eee cence eeeeneeeeeeceeaeeeeseeeeaeeeeeeeeeeesseseeaeeeeeeeaaeeeeseeaeeeeeenneeeeees 53

Basic Math Review

Before we get started with foodservice and finance calculations, let’s do some basic math
review to make sure we’re on the same page. Much of the confusion around calculations
problems on the RD exam stem from memorizing formulas in a single way and not being able to
rearrange the formula to solve for different concepts. For example, knowing the equation for
Edible Portion but not being able to rearrange it to calculate As Purchased price.

You'll also need to be comfortable with unit conversions, including the conversion of minutes to
hours, ounces to pounds, and percentages in percent format (out of 100) versus decimal format
(out of 1).

Rearranging formulas
For a given formula, you should be able to rearrange and solve for other variables. Y= 7

To solve for M: Multiply each side of the equation by X, which is the same as X/1.
The X’s will cancel out on the right side of the equation, leaving us with X x

Xx MX
Y=M. —x Y=—xo

1 xX 1
To solve for X: You can solve for X from the original question for Y, or XxY=M

from the newest equation we solved for, of M. Note that the intermediate
step when solving for X from the Y equation is solving for M.

Calculations and Formulas 3
© 2022 Veritense™

From M, to solve for X (which is multiplied with Y), we need to divide l
both sides by Y. Dividing by Y is the same as multiplying by 1 / Y. —x(X¥x Y)=Mx-
Then the Y’s cancel out on the left side of the equation, leaving you f
with X = M/Y. When you multiply (X x Y) by 1/Y, you can also think M

about the X x Y having a denominator of 1, which makes it easier to Y

see how the Y crosses out. When you multiply M by 1/Y, you're left

with M/Y.

Multiplying versus dividing by percentages

A point of confusion among some students is whether to multiply or divide

Multiplying makes
by percentages, especially with Edible Portion and As Purchased. Think it smaller
about which should be bigger — your starting amount or your ending
amount. Note that you should always convert percentages to decimals 20 + 10% = 2
during calculations. You can choose to write the math out as a decimal or
percent but if you write it as a percent, as | do in some of these examples, Dividing makes it
just be sure to multiply or divide by the decimal format. bigger

. 20
Conversions noe
°

In addition to foodservice conversions for tablespoons to teaspoons, cups

to gallons, and scoop and can numbers, you also need to easily convert between ounces and
pounds. Be sure to follow your units throughout the calculation so you don’t select the wrong
answer. Multiple choice answers for calculation questions may have trick answers, meaning that
if you forgot a final conversion from ounces to pounds, they will have the ounces answer
included.

Given that 3 teaspoons are equal to 1 tablespoon, and that 4 tablespoons are equal to % cup,
answer the following questions. Verify your answers using an online search engine or
conversion calculator. Write out your work and use diagrams if you find them helpful. It’s
important for calculation questions while you’re studying and on the day of the exam to write out
your work on scrap paper or a whiteboard.

3 teaspoons 1 tablespoon

4 tablespoons % Cup
e How many teaspoons are in % cup?

e How many teaspoons are in 1 cup?

e How many tablespoons are in 1 cup?

e How many tablespoons are in 1 4% cups?

e If 1 cup is 8 fl oz, how many fl oz are in 3 tablespoons?

Calculations and Formulas 4
© 2022 Veritense™

Given that 2 cups are in 1 pint, and 2 pints are in 1 quart, answer the following questions. Verify
your answer using an online search engine or conversion calculator.

2 pints 1 quart

e How many tablespoons are in 1 pint?

e How many teaspoons are in 1 pint?

e How many cups are in 1 quart?

e How many tablespoons in 1 quart?

e If 1 cup is 8 fl oz, how many fl oz are in a pint? A quart?

Given that there are 4 quarts in 1 gallon, answer the following questions. Verify your answers

using an online search engine or conversion .
calculator. i fl

e How may cups are in 1 gallon? =

e How many pints are in 1 gallon?

e How many teaspoons are in 1 gallon?

e How many quarts are in % gallon? 4 quarts 1 gallon

If you can anchor on one of these equivalents, then you can always calculate back and forth. In
the previous example questions, you had to calculate not only for the direct conversions |
supplied, like teaspoons to tablespoons, but also from teaspoons to cups, etc.

Calculations and Formulas

5
© 2022 Veritense™

If you know that 1 cup is 8 fl z and a gallon is 128 fl oz, then you can calculate the number of
cups per gallon by dividing 128 by 8 oz. If you know that there are 16 cups in 1 gallon and that 1
cup is 8 fl oz, you can calculate the oz per gallon by multiplying 16 by 8 which is 128 fl oz. You'll
want to be particularly familiar with 1 quart = 32 oz because we'll use that with scoop size
conversions in the next section.

1T 1 cup 1 pint 1 quart 1 gallon
0.5 fl oz 8 floz 2 cups 2 pints 4 quarts
3 tsp 16T 32T 4 cups 8 pints
64T 16 cups

Calculations and Formulas 6
© 2022 Veritense™

Scoop Size

Scoop numbers (found on a scoop handle) refer to the number of scoops per quart. For
example, a #4 scoop has 4 scoops per quart, so a single #4 scoop is equivalent % quart, or 1
cup, or 8 fl oz. If you know that 1 quart is 32 fl oz, then divide 32 by the scoop number for the
number of fl ounces.

Smaller Volume

Scoop Size

Scoop Number #4 #8 #16

Smaller Number

Serving sizes are often in whole units like 1 cup, % cup, or % cup. While you can use scoop
sizes in between those (which would be #4, #8, and #16), it’s not common. You don’t need to
memorize the equivalents, particularly for the #5, #6, etc. scoops with half-number equivalents,
as long as you know that Scoop # = scoops per quart and that a quart is 32 fl oz.

32 32

Scoop Volume = ——————- Scoop Size = ————_—_—_—_
scoop size scoop volume

If you’re given a scoop size, you can calculate volume of that scoop by dividing 32 fl oz by the
scoop size. If you’re given scoop volume, you can calculate which scoop number that
corresponds to by dividing 32 by the scoop volume.

32 32

= 8 fl oz per scoop 8 floz = #4 scoop

#4 scoop

Calculations and Formulas 7
© 2022 Veritense™

Calculate the volume of each scoop number in the following table and check that your
calculations are correct.

Dy
Scoop __ Equivalent Cups Fluid GaN
Number Ounces
#4 |16T ~~ | 1cup | 8floz—

#8 8T Ye Cup 4 fl oz
1 quart
2 pints
4 cups

# 20 31/455 T 1/5 cup 1.6 fl oz 64T

e If you have 1 gallon of food, and serve it using a #4 scoop, how many servings will you get?
e Which scoop is bigger, a #4 scoop or a #16 scoop?

Can Size

In foodservice operations, we use larger size
cans than you might purchase at your grocery
store. In your supervised practice kitchen rotation,
you likely saw number 10 (#10) cans which are
big! The tomato paste can is an example — the

weight is listed as 6 Ib 15 oz, instead of just DA KX OC
ounces. In contrast, a standard soup can is about [ri A I :
20 oz, corresponding to a number 2 can. eS a

For the exam, you will need to know one #10 can = 3 quarts and there are 6 cans per
case.

How many fl oz are in a single case of #10 cans?
#10 can = 3 qt = 32 floz*3 = 96 floz

6cans 96 floz
x Od
case 1 can

= 6 * 96 fl oz = 576 fl oz = 18 quarts

Calculations and Formulas 8
© 2022 Veritense™

Can Number Equivalent Weight
14 - 16 oz
303 | 2cups——— | 16-1702

2 | 25cups | 19-20 oz
jo | 3qt_ | 6 lb 15 0z

e You have a recipe written using #2 cans but want to use #10 cans. The recipe calls for 8
#2 cans of food. How many #10 cans will you need?

Another type of calculation that might trick you on the exam is Remember: 1 case of #10 cans has 6 cans
when they ask about cases. Just like foodservice operations
use large cans, they often purchase goods by the case instead
of in single units. You may order pasta in 16 oz boxes, but 12
boxes come in a case. You'll need to convert what you need
into number of cases to buy.

For example, if you are preparing a recipe that needs 29 number 10 cans of tomato paste, how
many cases do you need to purchase?

1 case
29 cans X = 4.83 cases > round UP always
6 cans

— 5 cases

If dividing by 6 cans felt strange to you, think about it this way. The number of cases we
purchase will be less than the number of cans we need, so we need to divide 29 (what the
recipe calls for) by the number in a case to make it smaller. If we knew that we were ordering 5
cases, and wanted to know how many individual cans would be there, we would multiply cases
by number of cans per case. You can also think about the division in terms of how you set up
the equation. 29 cans are in the numerator, which means if we are multiplying, the 6 cans has to
be in the denominator. Remember that Y x 1/X is the same as Y/X.

Rounding Up

Whenever you get a partial number for your answer in a foodservice calculation problem, realize
that you need to round up. You don’t follow the standard math rounding rule where a decimal 2
0.5 means rounding up and otherwise you round down. Why? Because if you need 4.8 cases,
like in the example above, and you only order 4 cases, you won’t have enough cans to complete
the recipe. In the example above, if we order 5 cases of 6 cans each, we would have 30 cans. If
our recipe calls for 29 cans, there would be 1 left over. If it's a commonly used item, we wouldn't
worry about “overordering” because it will be used for another recipe, or stay in inventory as par
stock.

Calculations and Formulas 9

© 2022 Veritense™

Finance Concepts

Important finance concepts to know for the exam include financial procedures, types of budgets,
balance sheets, cost-benefit analysis, break-even point, and full-time equivalents.

Budget Types

A foodservice manager needs to be familiar with different budget types, and thus, you need to
know it on the exam. Look through the following terms and their definitions, noting the features
of each and particularly, the differences in each. A question about budgets on the exam will
likely be a “keyword question” like the examples below. You would go online (or look on the next
page) to define each of the answer choices (first question), or identify which type of budget the
definition refers to (second question). Write that out in your notes, add it to your “Terms to
Know” sheet, and now you know more than you did!

Answer: A

Q: A budget prepared by upper management and given to operating units is
what type of budget?

a. Top-down budget

b. Bottom-up budget

c. Zero-based budget
d. Fixed budget

Q: Which statement best describes an incremental budget? Answer: C

Each unit prepares a budget that is then sent up to upper
management

. Start with a previous budget and adjust for current conditions
Use existing budgets and add increasing amounts relative to the
current budget
Prepared by upper management and given to operating units

Many fact-based questions like this remain simple on the exam (in contrast to food science
questions and clinical questions, where multiple concepts are combined into one question). It’s
important to be familiar with terms that will be on the exam because they are the easiest to test
in a standardized test. Reviewing information in this study guide gets you one step closer to
being exposed to the information you need to know.

Calculations and Formulas 10
© 2022 Veritense™

Budget Types

Top-down budget: prepared by upper management and given to operating units. Activity-
based budgeting is a type of top-down budget where the company sets targets or outputs, and
then determines the activities necessary to meet the target and the cost of carrying out those
activities.

Bottom-up budget: each unit prepares a budget that is then sent up to upper management
Baseline budget: starts with previous budget and adjusts for current conditions

Zero-based budget: determines cost, outlay, and inflows without a baseline budget. A manager
has to justify every expense with nothing automatically approved. Zero-based budgets aim to
eliminate any unnecessary expenditures. It can be very time consuming and works better for
discretionary costs than with essential operating costs.

Fixed budget: also called static budgets; they do not change based on business variations.
Even if business activity volume increases, the funding for those activities remains static.

Flexible budget: changes with business activity because the budget is constructed with a rate
per unit of activity rather than a fixed amount. Flexible budgets are useful for measuring
efficiency. So, if business activity increases, the amount of money needed to support that
increase is available.

Incremental budget: uses existing budget numbers as a base and adds incremental amounts
relative to the current budget. It is one of the most common budgeting methods due to simplicity
but is more appropriate when primary cost drivers of a company do not change from year to
year. This type of budget can be inefficient because if there is room for a 10% budget increase
each year, and a manager claims that increase for their unit, it can “perpetuate inefficiencies”,
make a team look overly efficient, and typically ignores external drivers like high inflation and
regular growth.

The term value proposition budgeting is a budget-building mindset. The manager asks, why

is this amount included in the budget? does the item create value? does the value outweigh the
cost? If not, is there another way to justify the cost? It is similar to zero-based budgeting in that
it aims to tighten up the budget but not to the extent of a zero-based budget.

Write out all the terms in this section and their definitions. Consider making flashcards as well
that you can play matching games with.

Finance Ratios

Finance ratios use numbers from a company’s financial statement to describe the financial state
of the company. When looking for investors, presenting a business plan, or looking for a loan,
these finance ratios may be used.

Calculations and Formulas 11
© 2022 Veritense™

Specifically, finance ratios can be used to assess liquidity, leverage, growth, margins,
profitability, rates of return, and overall valuation.

The finance ratios you need to know for the 2017 exam are below.

Assets-to-liabilities ratio: the percentage of assets divided by debt

Debt-to-equity ratio: the percentage of assets funded by shareholder’s equity and debt
Inventory turnover rate: assess if there is efficient use of assets

Profitability ratios: ability to generate excess income relative to sales

Solvency ratio: ability to meet long-term debts

Liquidity ratio: ability to meet short-term debts

Activity ratio: ability to transfer non-cash assets to cash assets

Current ratio: divide current assets by current liabilities. Represents an organization's ability to
meet current financial obligations (bill-paying activity). Used by creditors to determine if an
organization has sufficient assets to repay debts over the next 12 months. A current ratio
greater than 1 indicates an ability to pay bills when due and over the next 12 months.

Uniform systems of accounts is a standard method of accounting within an industry. These
include presentation of financial statements that provide comparability of financial data of
different companies within an industry.

A public accountant works with clients to issue educated tax advice, or to provide advice on
business decisions/transactions, or insurance and benefits that would impact tax results.

Internal audit processes examine a company’s financial records to ensure their quality and
legality.

Create flashcards for the terms on this page and then match the terms to the definitions.

Calculations and Formulas 12
© 2022 Veritense™

Balance Sheets

A balance sheet is the statement of an organizations current and fixed assets, current and long-
term liabilities, and owner's equity.

Balance sheets are split in a “T’-shape with assets on the left side, and liabilities and owner’s
equity on the right side. Total assets must equal total liabilities + equity.

Here’s an example balance sheet to help you orient the terms on the following pages.

Balance Sheet
as of Dec 31, 2018 in (000s)

Assets Liabilities
Cash 481 | Accounts payable 190
Accounts Receivable 1,677 | Taxes Payable 36
Inventory 2,936 | Accrued Expenses 157
Prepaid Expenses 172

Ciher Gurent Assets 56 Total Current Liabilities 383

Long-Term Debt 922
Total Liabilities 1,305

Total Current Assets 2,386 Owner’s Equity

Common Stock 194
Property and Equipment 2,019 | Retained Earnings 2,242
Accumulated Depreciation (664) | Total Owner's Equity 2,436
Net 1,355
Total Assets 3,741 | Total Liabilities and Equity 3,741

You may get a question that lists financial terms, like income and rent among others, and then
asks you to calculate net profit. You need to know what counts as income and what counts as
expenses. These concepts don’t translate directly into a balance sheet but we'll talk about those
concepts in practice problems and when we get to the section on break-even point.

Calculations and Formulas 13
© 2022 Veritense™

Terms for balance sheets include the following:
Net profit: also called final profit; subtracts expenses from gross profit

Total assets: indicate monetary value of a property beyond any amounts owed —
everything a company owns, including liabilities

Current assets: liquid assets, or those easily converted to cash (ex: accounts
receivable)

Accounts receivable: Money owed to the company that will be fulfilled promptly, such
as pending credit card payments or pending payments from a large catering order

Accounts payable: Money the company owes, such as to vendors or wholesalers.
These might be transactions that aren’t completed each time an order comes in but
rather on a monthly or quarterly basis

Accumulated depreciation: a fixed asset; the total depreciation of an asset up toa
given date subtracted from the original cost at time of purchase

Current liabilities: include accounts payable and accrued expenses that must be paid
within 12 months

Owner’s equity: monetary value of property beyond debts, including retained earnings

Retained earnings: income set aside by the company instead of being distributed to
shareholders

Take out a sheet of paper and create your own balance sheet. Using the terms you've learned,
write them in where they belong, and then define them.
The following terms are included on the income statement.

Gross profit: total sales minus the costs of goods sold (COGS)

Operating costs: expenses

Costs of goods sold: COGS, the cost of producing the goods that are sold

Calculations and Formulas 14
© 2022 Veritense™

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Cost-benefit analysis estimates the total monetary value of benefits that will be derived from a
project and compares that value to the cost of a project. Cost-benefit analysis helps decide if the
planned project is worthwhile in financial terms.

To conduct a cost-benefit analysis, you may perform productivity studies, determine if startup
funds are necessary, and determine the number of people involved to quantify cost and benefit.

For the RD exam, be able to recognize examples of cost-benefit analysis or situations where it
should be used in contrast to methods like value analysis and value-added research.

For example — Should we remodel the foodservice kitchen?

The cost of remodeling is $3.4 million and the expected revenue generated after the remodeling
is $2.7 million. Is the value of the remodeling greater than the cost of the project?

Expected revenue following remodeling (value) — cost of the project
$2.7 million - $3.4 million = negative (net loss)

$2.7 million / $3.4 million = < 1

In this example, the cost of remodeling is greater than what we would expect to generate
following the remodeling. Perhaps the goal of the remodel is to increase the number of
customers served, thus increasing revenue. When people decide to remodel their home, they
often think of the cost of the remodel versus the increase in home value in case they want to
sell. Some remodeling decisions translate to increases in home value while others do not.

Value Analysis

Value analysis is the systematic assessment of every feature of a product to ensure its cost is
no greater than is required to achieve its function. When evaluating a product, a manager might
ask themselves, “Can the cost of this item or step be reduced or eliminated, without reducing
the effectiveness, quality, or customer satisfaction?”

Value is a balance of quality and cost that is affected by many factors. Improving quality may
not be cost-effective, that is, the increased cost spent to improve quality may not transfer into
added value. Note that increasing the cost spent does not always add value. Another challenge
is that standards of quality will vary by organization and product type. Thus, there is no single
way to “increase quality” because there is no one single definition of quality. Specifically, in food
service, quality is defined by customer satisfaction. Increased quality, in theory, should
decrease costs by eliminating errors and mistakes — like food being sent back by a customer or
thrown away because it did not sell.

Know that there are 5 factors that affect quality and they include money, materials,
management, people, and market.

Calculations and Formulas 15
© 2022 Veritense™

Here’s a schematic of how value analysis is related to increased value. The other terms in the
diagram may sound familiar or they may come up again in your studies. Value analysis may
result in quality improvement, cost reduction, or functionality enhancement, all 3 of which have
the potential to increase value. Cost reduction in particular may increase value in that it
increases profit while the value of the product to the customer remains the same.

Increased

Value

Cost reduction

Value

Analysis

Function analysis

enhancement
Value-Added Research

“Value-added” is when a business adds something extra to a generic product that gives a
greater perception of value. Thus, value-added research is the process of assessing if value
should be added.

Pre-cut produce at the grocery store - A rising trend in grocery stores has been to cater to
customers looking to eat healthy while short on time. Publix marketing shows that their pre-cut
vegetables, including spiralized and ready-to-steam veggies, are “FRESH & CONVENIENT”,
conveying added value to the customer.

$+ time

$$ + value

Calculations and Formulas 16
© 2022 Veritense™

Break-Even Point

Break-even point is when expenses and revenue are equal (total costs = total revenue). It’s
used to determine the number of sales or overall profits that will cover total costs.

Write down the definition of break-even point.
Total cost includes both fixed costs and variable costs.
Total Costs = Fixed Costs + Variable Costs

Fixed costs are the same over a time period and aren’t relevant to output decisions — things like
rent, equipment, insurance, interests, property taxes, salaries, and depreciation.

Variable costs vary with output and typically increase at a constant rate relative to labor costs
and capital. Variable costs may include labor costs (hourly wages), utilities, and production
costs.

To find the break-even point, find the point on the graph where the revenue line and total costs
line cross one another. Then, draw the lines back to the y and x axis from the intersection to
estimate dollars in revenue and units sold.

e What components make up total costs?
e What accounts for the difference between the fixed cost and total cost line?

To calculate the break-even point, you don’t need to graph it by hand. Instead, you can use two
different formulas, based on the information provided.

Revenue
Total costs
Dollars Fixed costs

Units sold

Calculations and Formulas 17
© 2022 Veritense™

Given fixed costs, variable costs, and total sales, you can calculate the break-even point using
formula 1. If you’re given fixed costs, sales price per unit, and variable cost per unit, you can
use formula 2.

Fixed costs
Variable costs
(1 ~ ( Sales ))

Fixed Costs
(Sales price per unit) — (Variable cost per unit)

Formula 1:

Formula 2:

Note that the denominator in formula 2 (Sales price per unit — variable cost per unit) is also
known as the “Contribution margin”.

Contribution margin
= Sales price per unit — Variable cost per unit

e If variable cost per unit goes down, the contribution margin goes up. What are variable
costs?

Example 1.1

If fixed costs are $85,000, variable costs are $21,000, and total sales are $420,000, calculate
the break-even point.

Which formula will you use?

Fixed costs $85,000
Formula 1: 2. = RS
Variable costs 1-( $21,000 )
1— ( Sales ) $420,000

First, calculate the denominator

Variable costs _ $21,000 = 0.08
Sales $420,000
Variable costs comprise about 5% of all sales.
1—0.05 = 0.95

Then we divide fixed costs by 1 — proportion of variable costs relative to sales, which we just
calculated.

$85,000

Calculations and Formulas 18
© 2022 Veritense™

Example 1.2

Given that fixed costs are $85,000, sales price per unit is $42, and variable cost per unit is $12,
we'll use Formula 2 and calculate the denominator first (the contribution margin).

Fixed Costs

Formula 2: Sales price per unit) — (Variable cost per unit)

_ $85,000 _— $85,000
~ $42—$12 $30

Note how in formula 1, we calculate the amount of revenue to equal expenses, but in formula 2,
we calculate the number of units that we need to sell in order to generate said revenue.

Practice Question

= 2,833 units

On the exam you may be given a list of items, like below, or given direct estimations of fixed
costs, variable costs, etc. In this example you'll walk through the steps you need to take to
calculate break-even point. It might be more complicated than it seems at first!

Joe’s Diner has the following financial numbers for the past 6 months. Calculate the break-even
point.

Step 1: Go back to where the fixed costs and variable costs are described. Write whether each
item below is a fixed cost, sales, or variable cost.

Rent: $5,000 Utilities: $2,500
Wages: $12,050 Insurance: $3,300
Food Purchasing Costs: $13,110 Property Taxes: $2,500

Total Sales: $29,690

Step 2: Calculate totals for each category (fixed costs, total sales, variable costs).
Step 3: Write down the break-event point formula you'll use in this question.

Step 4: Calculate the break-even point.

Calculations and Formulas 19
© 2022 Veritense™

Full-Time Equivalents

We calculate full time equivalents (FTEs) because as a supervisor, you'll often receive your
labor budget in terms of FTEs, not the number of employees you can hire.

On the exam, you may be asked to calculate FTEs based on the given information in a simple
calculation, or it might be used for a patient-based or volume-based scenario.

FTEs: one full-time equivalent (1 FTE) is equal to 40 hours per week, or 8 hours per day
(assuming a 5-day work week). An employee working 20 hours per week would be equivalent to
0.5 FTE.

What unit does FTE carry?
1 FTE 7

In contrast to food calculation questions where we always round up our answer, you don’t round
your FTEs answers. Budgets can handle partial FTEs.

FTE Calculation Examples

Example 2.1: Given that full-time employees work 236 of 365 days per year (given vacation and
benefit days), how many FTE are needed for daily coverage?

365 days/year __ 1.5% FTE
236 work days/year .

1.55 FTEs is required for each full-time position.
Why not 1 FTE for each full-time? Because its daily coverage (7 days a week)!
You can also write out the formula as:

365 days 1 year
1 year * 236 work days

Always remember that your units need to be opposite — see how year is in the numerator in one
portion of the equation but in the denominator in the other? If you’re having trouble deciding
between multiplying and dividing, be sure to write out your formulas all the way, like | did here,
to break up the units.

Example 2.2 You have 2 positions to fill, each for 7 days per week working 6:30am to 3pm with
a 30-minute lunch. How many productive FTEs do you need for these positions?

Calculations and Formulas 20
© 2022 Veritense™

6:30 am to 3 pm = 8.5 hours — 0.5 hour lunch = 8 hours
8 hours X 7 days X 2 workers = 112 hours

112 hours/week

——_————. = 2.8 FTE.
40 hours/week .

How would you write out the formula above, breaking up the units?

112 hours 1week
1 week * 40 hours

Example 2.3: Your foodservice operation requires thirteen 8-hour positions, four 4-hour
positions, and one 3-hour position. How many FTEs does your foodservice operation need for
daily demands?

(13 x 8 hours) + (4x 4 hours) + (1x 3 hours)
= 104+ 16+3 hours = 123 hours
123 hours

—_—_——_—_—_—_—_—- = 15.37 FTE
8 hours per day s

Finance and Foodservice
Monthly Food Cost

Monthly food cost is calculated by summing the month's opening inventory + purchases made
during the month, and then subtracting the closing inventory. Note that the closing inventory is
the beginning inventory for the next month.

Cost of food = Opening Inventory + Purchases — Closing Inventory

Remember that opening, or beginning, inventory serves as the basis to calculate cost-of-goods-
sold (COGS), and the overall net income. If you begin with a falsely inflated beginning inventory,
that will inflate COGS, inflate cost of production, and decrease estimated net income. While
monthly food cost may seem simple, it’s easy to get confused. Let's start with the concept in
basic terms, such as boxes of inventory, and walk through the changes that inventory sees over
the course of a month.

Calculations and Formulas 21
© 2022 Veritense™

You have 5 boxes (gray) in your inventory on April 18. During April, you purchase two boxes
during the month (white). At the end of the month (or at your next opening inventory) you have 3
boxes left. It doesn’t matter which boxes are left over (gray or white, existing or new). You have
3 boxes left.

Opening Inventory Purchases Closing Inventory
5 boxes 2 boxes 3 boxes

To elevate this example up to the level of the exam, replace boxes with monetary value.

Now let's say that the value of inventory on April 1%‘ is $10,000 and food purchases during the
month of April total $4,000. When you take inventory on the May 1°, the value of the inventory is

$6,000. What is your food cost for the month of April? Write the values in the corresponding
boxes below, splitting it up like we did with the boxes.

Opening Inventory Purchases Closing Inventory

Cost per Meal

On the exam, you may be given word problems that tell you how many people will be at an
event, the amount of food you purchased, and the budget requirements you were supposed to
meet. Given all of this information, you may be asked to calculate cost per meal, number of
meals, or total cost.

Total cost

Cost per meal = 77 i er of meals

Cost per meal questions can be tricky if you try working them through in your head. For
example, if you multiply the number of meals by the budget cost per meal, and subtract from
total cost, you'll end up with the wrong number. And that wrong number will likely be in the
answer choices.

Calculations and Formulas 22
© 2022 Veritense™

Cost Per Meal Example

Let’s say you’re cooking for a friend’s birthday party next week. You set a budget of $15 per
plate and expect 45 people to attend. You spent $550 on groceries for the party. How did you
do financially, compared to your budget?

Step 1: Given how much you spent and the number of meals to prepare, what will the cost per
meal be?

Cost j = SSOspent _ g19.29
ost per meal = 45 plates = .

Step 2: How does the cost per meal compare to your budget?
Actual cost per meal — budget cost per meal =
$12.22 — $15 =

—$2.78 ($2.78 under budget)

If instead, you thought “given the number of meals and my budget, how does my total cost
compare to my total budget?”, you would get a different value.

Given 45 meals x $15/meal = $675 expected total cost

$550 spent - $675 expected = $125 under (WRONG)

Practice Question

Remember to use a desktop calculator or a physical calculator, and use scrap paper to write out
your work. You won't be able to use the calculator on your phone during the exam.

Your department is catering the hospital’s board meeting lunch next week. There will be 30
people in attendance and the cost of food purchased for the event is $820. Your supervisor told
you last week the budget for the event was $25 per meal, maximum. Are you over or under your
supervisor's budget? By how much?

Over, $2.33
Under, $2.33
Over, $70
Under, $70

aoo0

Calculations and Formulas 23
© 2022 Veritense™

Forecasting

In any business, you may try to forecast future sales volume to better estimate preparation or
anticipated costs. There are different forecast methods and they make different assumptions.

There are 3 main types of forecasting, including qualitative techniques, time series and
projection, and causal models.

Qualitative techniques are based on expert opinion and consider special events relevant
to the industry. The idea of special events can be illustrated easily with the technology field — a
fast-paced industry that has to account for exponential growth in technological knowledge.
Qualitative techniques may or may not consider historical data. They include Delphi methods,
market research, panel consensus, visionary forecast, and historical analogy.

Time series and projections, including exponential smoothing and moving averages, look
at patterns and changes in patterns using only historical data. If you have a new product, or are
running a new menu campaign without historical data, you would not be able to use these

methods. You would want to turn instead to qualitative information since historical data is scant.

When using a moving average, each value of the average is the average of n consecutive
points prior. The number of data points prior (n) depend on the effect of seasons, stability of the
estimate, and anticipated irregularity. If you use a 3-month moving average, the average for
month 4 would be an average of the previous 3 months, rather than an average of the entire
past year. Exponential smoothing is similar to moving average but gives more weight to recent
data points.

Note that moving average and exponential smoothing models assume that sales follow a certain
pattern over time. We can then project that pattern, accounting for differences we anticipate.
The simplest type of projection would assume constant growth. Other types of time series and
projections include Box-Jenkins, X-11, trend projections, and life-cycle analysis among others.

Causal methods for forecasting include regression models, econometric models,
intention-to-buy surveys, and input-output models. You may see regression on the exam,
such as “linear regression”. Regression models can include the effect of several variables or
factors that will influence anticipated sales volume. These models are more statistically
intensive than moving averages but do not assume a certain pattern in sales.

Calculations and Formulas 24
© 2022 Veritense™

Looking at your cafeteria sales volume for the past year, you notice that sales for fresh foods,
like the salad bar, are highest in the summer and lowest in the winter compared to sales for hot
foods, like the soup bar, which are highest in the winter and lowest in the summer. Pizza sales
are about the same each month throughout the year. How might you forecast future sales
volume with your historical data?

This graph (right) shows the month of the

year on the x-axis, starting with January, Cafeteria Sales (2019) Soup Bar
and the sales in dollars on the y-axis. The - ~ eee Ger
ome Pizza

legend tells us that the solid gray line
represents soup bar sales, the dashed
black line represents salad bar sales, and
the solid black line represents pizza
sales. We can see that soup bar sales
are lowest in the summer, while salad bar
sales are highest in the summer, as the
question stated. Pizza sales are similar
throughout the year.

Pizza Sales

We can calculate a moving average for
pizza sales (right). In the graph, actual
sales are in solid gray, the 4-month
moving average is in solid black, and the
12-month average is in dashed black.
You can see how the average lines
(black) are smoothed out versions of the
dips and peaks of the actual sales.
Furthermore, there’s not much difference
between the 4-month and the 12-month.
Why? Because sales are nearly constant
throughout the year.

If we were to use moving averages for
salad bar or soup bar projections — both
of which display seasonal changes in
sales volume — we would end up with
offset pushed projections by whatever
month window we choose. In the graph to
the right, we have the salad bar
projection with a moving average. See Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
how it mirrors the shape of the actual Month

sales, but shifts by 4 months? If we were
to use this projection, the volume of sales we prepare for would likely not match customer
demand if the overall pattern is the same as the previous year.

Calculations and Formulas 25
© 2022 Veritense™

So, for items with seasonal changes in sales volume, a moving average is less than desirable.
Instead, we might want to know what the 3 or 4-month average for each quarter would be.
Projecting for smaller windows based on the same window in the previous year isn’t a moving
average because it doesn’t shift with
each consecutive month. In the
graph to the right, actual sales are in
gray, and a 3-month average of peak
salad bar sales is in black. You can
see how the 3-month average more
closely aligns to actual sales,
compared to the 12-month average.

Salad Bar Sales

Sizing up recipes Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Month

Sizing up recipes, also known as
“scaling”, for foodservice systems involves more than just calculating a scaling factor and
applying it to every ingredient. Not all ingredients in a recipe will scale the same, and the
implications for cooking volume and storage are important to consider. There’s a reason that
large scale food organizations have entire departments dedicated to scaling up recipes and it’s
not just full of mathematicians. These departments include food science experts, process and
chemical engineers, and recipe formulators.

Large scale food production is more than changing a 4-portion recipe to 9-portions. Ingredients
may go from teaspoons and cups up to pounds and gallons. Ingredients don’t always behave
the same at larger volumes, and an ingredient may no longer be stable. You'll also need to
consider what equipment you need, storage, labor, and personal safety. You also have to
reconsider critical control points for pathogen control and if those critical control points may
change depending on the volume and storage of the ingredient.

Brainstorm some differences that would occur when creating the following recipes at home
versus in amounts for a large hospital patient population.

e Baked bread, 1 loaf per day — scale up to — baked bread, 50 loaves per day
o Will you mix, proof, and bake the dough 1 loaf at a time? If not, what do you need
to consider in terms of equipment, storage, and time?
e Scrambled eggs, 2 portions — scale up to — scrambled eggs, 100 portions
o Will you be pooling your eggs together? Will you scramble eggs 2 portions at a
time in a stove-top pan?
e Roast chicken, 1 unit — scale up to — roast chicken, 30 units
o You have to prep and roast 30 chickens. What do you need for storage, cooking,
and holding?

Calculations and Formulas 26
© 2022 Veritense™

BUY

- @pa
It may be cheaper to buy an item than to make

it in-house, especially if you only need small volumes. On the other hand, depending on the
item, it could be more expensive to buy it than to make it in-house. Some considerations include
skill required (pastry chef?), special equipment (new oven?), or extra staff in order to produce
an item in house.

Make-or-Buy Decision

Make-or-buy decisions are a strategic choice
deciding between producing an item in-house or
buying it externally.

If you cannot find a competent or reliable supplier to purchase the item from, especially if the
item needs to be consistently of high quality, it may be worth
it in the end to create it yourself.

Example: Strawberry Shortcake in the Hospital Cafeteria

Your chef comes to you, the foodservice manager, with an
idea for a new dessert item next month — strawberry
shortcake. You meet to discuss if you should make or buy the
shortcake. What factors will you likely discuss, particularly in
terms of time, volume, and staffing?

Cost-of-Goods Sold

Cost-of-goods sold (COGS) are the expenses that go into products sold. COGS include
purchasing, labor, food costs, etc.

COGS is calculated as the cost of goods during a specific period of time and is very similar to
calculating monthly food cost. The key difference is that we’re not only interested in the cost of
food, but also the cost of goods and associated expenses, including labor. COGS can be
calculated with or without labor. If the question asks for COGS and provides labor expenses,
then you can use the formula below to calculate COGS. If labor isn’t included, then it is the
same formula as cost of food sold.

Cost of goods sold = Opening Inventory + (Purchases + Labor) — Closing Inventory

We use COGS to calculate gross profit. Gross profit is a profitability measure that shows how
efficient a company manages its labor and supplies in production. Net income will decrease as
the COGS goes up, so we often try to keep COGS low in order to maximize profits.

Revenue — COGS = Gross Profit
Given the following expenses, calculate the COGS for the month of March.

Inventory value on March 1 $25,730 Total purchases during March $44,757
Inventory value on April 1 $23,850 Labor expenses during March $15,309

Calculations and Formulas 27
© 2022 Veritense™

ee) ee
Opening Inventory Purchases + Labor Closing Inventory
See if you get the correct answer: $61,946.

e If revenue for the month of March was $120,234, what was our gross profit?

As COGS goes up, gross profit goes down. If we overstate our beginning inventory, how is
COGS affected? How is gross profit affected? Re-calculate COGS using the numbers below —
note that the inventory value on March 1 has gone up.

Inventory value on March 1 $34,890 Total purchases during March $44,757
Inventory value on April 1 $23,850 Labor expenses during March $15,309

If beginning inventory is inflated, COGs will be higher. If ending inventory is inflated, COGS will
be lower (because you're subtracting that number).

Since gross profit is the difference in revenue and COGS, a higher COGS will lead to lower
profit, and a lower COGS will lead to greater profit.

Draw out diagrams or formulas that will help you understand the relationship between gross
profit, COGS, and other financial components.

Depreciation

Large pieces of equipment are large investments. Over time, their value decreases. Just as a
brand-new car loses substantial value the moment it is driven off the lot, a brand-new oven will
depreciate over time.

Knowing the salvage value and the usable life of a piece of equipment helps you consider the
purchase investment in context. You might choose a different model that is more expensive up
front if it has a longer usable life and/or a higher salvage cost. Salvage value is the monetary
value of the item at the end of its usable life.

To calculate yearly depreciation, subtract salvage Yearly Depreciation (Countertop Fryer)
value from the cost of the equipment and divide it by
years of usable life. This method is called straight-line
depreciation, where the item depreciates the same
amount each year. Note that the cost of the
equipment is what you pay when you purchase it.

Calculations and Formulas 28
© 2022 Veritense™

Yearly d ‘ation = Cost of Equipment — Salvage value
eanty ceprecialion = Years of Usable Life
For example, if you purchase a countertop fryer for $990, estimate the useful life of 5 years, and
salvage value at $100, you can calculate the yearly depreciation. Yearly depreciation can also
be called annual depreciation.
Cost of Equipment—Salvage value _ $990—$100

reciati > T
Annual depreciation Years of Usable Life S years $178 per yea

You try one. Your department purchased a new bread oven for $16,000. The salvage value is
estimated at $600 and the expected usable life is 11 years. Calculate the yearly depreciation.

Tips for Calculation Questions

When you're doing practice questions, use a calculator on your computer, or a physical
calculator. During the exam, you'll have one of these 2 options — but you won't be able to use
the one on your phone. So, don’t use the calculator on your phone when you’re doing practice
calculations.

Furthermore, utilize scrap paper or a small white board to write out your calculations. Be sure to
use units, and don’t round your decimals until the very end. Write out each step of the
calculation because missing a step is usually how you miss the question. If a calculation
involves multiple concepts, such as cost per meal and edible portion, write those out next to
your calculations so you can see — this is where I’m going to calculate cost per meal and over
here is where | am going to calculate EP.

Food calculation questions on the RD exam are particularly tough, primarily because they often
do involve multiple concepts but also because many of the practice problems on the internet are
simple, with 1 concept and maybe a few steps.

As you go through the following sections, particularly edible portion/as purchased, figure out the
way that makes most sense to you. It might be that the formulas click for you but for a
classmate, they think about it more conceptually or even draw out diagrams.

Edible Portion and Yield

When we purchase food, the raw amount does not always equal the cooked or prepped amount
used in the recipe. When reading questions on the exam, it’s important to note if they use words
like “raw” or “as purchased” versus “cooked”, or “cleaned”, or “prepped”.

If you buy a pint of strawberries and the recipe calls for sliced strawberries with the tops
removed, the actual weight used in the recipe will be different than the weight you purchased.
Yield from raw to prepped almost always decreases, which means you will need to buy more
than what is called for in the recipe. With meats, when you purchase the raw amount, it may
shrink with cooking or you may have a lower yield because you will not be using bones or
trimmings in the recipes. The yield from a raw, whole chicken that becomes a cooked, whole

Calculations and Formulas 29
© 2022 Veritense™

chicken compared to the cleaned meat quantity will all be different. Leafy greens reduce greatly
in size after cooking, and rice nearly doubles in size. Just as it’s important to know how much of
an ingredient to use when cooking, you need to pay attention to whether the recipe calls for
cooked or raw ingredients. Let’s start with definitions. Our hypothetical situation will be
calculating amounts and cost to make a batch of roasted potatoes.

As purchased quantity is the amount (weight, volume, or count) of the product as we
purchased it or received from a vendor. For your recipe, you received a 25-pound bag of
potatoes from your grocery vendor. This is your as-purchased quantity.

Edible portion quantity is the amount (weight, volume, or count) of the product after we have
prepared it. This could mean after we have cleaned, peeled, or trimmed the product, such as
with the potatoes. With leafy vegetables, it could mean after cooking. With meat, it could mean
after trimming fat, removing bones, and/or after cooking. In this hypothetical situation, we
scrubbed and peeled the potatoes and were left with 21.25 pounds of our original 25 pounds
that we purchased.

AP quantity — EP quantity = waste 25 lbs — 21.25 lbs = 3.75 lbs waste

We can calculate the yield by accounting for the trim or waste, which is the difference between
the as purchased quantity and the edible portion quantity. In this case, we may call it waste; with
meat, we might call it trim. If we calculate the EP quantity after cooking, we would also account
for shrinkage. To calculate yield, we divided the EP quantity and AP quantity. With yield, you’re
asking the question — how much of the AP quantity am | left with after trimming and waste?

EP quantity. 21.25 lbs

a ————~“ — 0, .
AP quantity yiela 25 Ibs 85% yield

If the question provided you with the 25 lbs as purchased quantity and 85% yield, you could
calculate the EP quantity by multiplying the two values.

AP quantity x yield = EP quantity 25 lbs X 85% = 21.25 lbs

Before we keep going, | want to introduce a helpful calculation triangle you may have seen
before. The triangle to the right is arranged to be reminiscent of how when we divide, one item
is on top of the other, and when we
multiply, the items are next to each other.
See how the location of EP quantity, AP
quantity, and yield correspond to their
formulas.

EP quantity
= AP quantity x yield

divide
Identify which term applies to the following ‘
products (AP quantity or EP quantity).

a. trimmed strawberries AP Vield = EP quantity
b. raw turkey purchased from grocer ti AP quantity
c. de-boned chicken quantity

d

pork roast after cooking

EP quantity

a | nt mt . ‘= » multip!
da ‘P‘da 90 ‘dv G‘dg AP quantity = ply

Calculations and Formulas 30
© 2022 Veritense™

Be aware that not all practice problems you find on the Internet will be at the difficulty level of
the CDR exam. Start with easier questions, but calibrate your sense of readiness by being sure
to try some practice questions from CDR. The practice questions in this study guide are
modeled after CDR questions, so they’re meant to be hard! Before we move on to cost, let’s
start with some easy ones so you can build up to the more complex practice questions.

Ex 3.1: You purchase 8 lbs of apples to make apple cider.
Is this your AP quantity or EP quantity? Why? - AP quantity
After peeling and coring, you end up with 6 Ibs of apples.

Is this your AP quantity or EP quantity? Why? - EP quantity AP
quantity

Calculate the percent yield.

From our triangle, we know that Yield = EPQ/APQ. Yield can be a factor (out of 1) or a percent (out of
100). We communicate yield as a percent, but when doing calculations, like for EP quantity or AP
quantity, you will use the yield factor.

EP quantity 6 lbs

Percent Yield = ——————— x 100% =

% = ft)
AP quantity 8 Ibs x 100% = 75%

Using the formulas in the triangle, now that you have EPQ, APQ, and yield, plug in the values to calculate
EP quantity and AP quantity (as if you did not know them) to see if the math works out.

Ex 3.2: You need 2 Ibs of cooked eggplant for a dish. The yield from raw to cooked eggplant is
81%. How much raw eggplant do you need to purchase?

Identify what you’re given and what you're calculating. Use your triangle to solve for AP.

. EP quantity 2lbs
AP quantity = yield = Del 2.47 lbs

Since we are going from cooked (EP), backwards to raw, it makes sense that the AP quantity is larger
than the EP quantity given. What if you mistakenly multiplied EP quantity by yield?

EP quantity x yield = 2 lbs X 0.81 = 1.62 lbs

It doesn’t make sense that you would buy 1.6 Ibs of eggplant to then have 2 Ibs ready for the recipe!

If you’re wondering, “when would | need to calculate AP from EP?” the answer is, “often!” if you
work in foodservice. Recipes may have ingredients in EP form, and unless you buy the items in
the prepared form (such as minced garlic rather than full garlic), you need to back-calculate to
the larger amount you need to purchase.

Exam problems are more complex than these for one reason: they often layer different
calculations. You may be given AP in ounces but asked for EP in pounds. You may need to
calculate EP quantity in order to calculate for EP cost (next section). If you can break down the
complex questions into small steps, you can solve them.

Calculations and Formulas 31
© 2022 Veritense™

Pull out your conversion reference sheet (or refer back to earlier in this study guide) because
we're going to add a few layers to these example problems. Then, you'll try some on your own
before moving on to cost and the practice questions.

Ex 3.3: You purchase 5 lb 2 oz of strip steak with a 50% yield. What is the EP quantity in pounds
and ounces?
You're given AP and yield; all you have to do is plug them into your equation (after converting to ounces!)

16 0z
lb

5 lb x = 80 0z; 80 oz + 2 oz = 82 oz EP quantity = AP quantity x yield = 82 0z x 0.5 = 41 0z

Now, to convert back to pounds and ounces.

16 oz
= 2.56 lbs;0.56 lbs x

4102 x Te ib

= 90z

You end up with 2 lbs 9 oz of steak as your EP quantity.

Ex 3.4: You need to purchase a turkey for holiday dinner that is large enough to feed a party of 45.
Yield for a whole turkey after cooking is 90%, and you are assuming 8 oz portions per person.
Your vendor has 15-pound turkeys available. How many do you need to buy?

i = i x =
EP quantity = 45 servings serving 360 oz
Now you can calculate AP from the 360 oz.
. EP quantity 3600z
AP quantity = ——__——_ = = 400 oz

yield 0.90

From here, you can go a few directions that will all get you to the right answer. You can convert 400 oz to lb and then
convert to number of turkeys, or you can convert 15 Ibs to oz.

4000z EP x —?— = 25 Ibs;25 lbs EP x em = 1.67 turk
oz EP x ié0z> Ss; s EP x iSibs 7h turkeys
= 2 turkeys
15 lb 16 02 240 oz; 400 oz EP turkey 1.67 turk
SX tp = 0Z; oz EP x 740 02 7 turkeys
= 2 turkeys

Calculations and Formulas 32
© 2022 Veritense™

Ex 3.5: You need to figure out how many cans of sliced peaches in syrup to purchase for this
week’s peach cobbler. The recipe calls for 8 quarts of peaches after draining and rinsing. Yield
from canned to drained is 90%. How many Number 10 cans do you need to purchase, knowing
that each can of peaches from your vendor weighs 6 Ib 10 oz.

This question has a lot in it. Let’s start by figuring out what’s what.

What are we solving for? AP quantity - the quantity of peaches we need to buy to get to our EP of
8 quarts.

Do we need to do any conversions? Yes! We need to get 8 quarts and 6 Ib 10 oz on the same
page.

Let’s start by converting the Number 10 can of peaches to oz, and the 8 quarts to oz.

16 0z

6lb x D

= 96 02; 96 oz + 10 oz = 106 oz per Number 10 can
32 0z

8 quarts X
quart

= 256 oz needed for the recipe (EP)

Now we need to calculate AP using the yield factor of 0.90.

EP quantity 256 0z
yield (0.90

AP quantity = = 284.44 0z ~ 285 oz
Now we need to use our knowledge that one Number 10 can of peaches in syrup is 106 oz to
figure out how many cans we need to buy to provide 285 oz of peaches.

Number 10 can
285 oz X ———————- = 2.69 cans ~ 3 cans
106 oz

Let's check our math to make sure we were supposed to divide and not multiply.

If one Number 10 can is 106 oz, how many oz would we get from 2 cans? 3 cans?

106 oz 2 212 106 oz 3 318
———_—_———_ X : x _
Number 10 can cans 02 Number 10 can cans 02

We can see that our math was correct, putting us between needing 2 and 3 cans. Remember from the
previous section on cans that we always round amounts (and cases) up. So, the answer for this
question is: we need to order 3 cans!

If this question had an additional part that specified cans are ordered in cases of 6, and asked for how
many cases rather than how many cans, you would answer 1 case.

As purchased cost is the amount paid for the as purchased amount.

As purchased cost per unit is the total AP cost divided by the quantity purchased (AP
quantity). We often calculate AP cost per unit using the units from the recipe.

Total AP Cost

—————_—— = AP cost it
AP quantity cost per unt

Calculations and Formulas 33
© 2022 Veritense™

Edible portion cost is the cost to the department of the portion served. The EP cost takes into
account the trim and waste that we calculated in the previous section with yield.
Total AP Cost AP cost per unit

Yield = EP cost —YViela = EP cost per unit

You can use a helpful calculations triangle
for AP cost and EP cost, just note that AP
and EP have flipped from the quantity
triangle.

AP cost

= EP cost x yield

Identify which term applies to the following

cost (AP cost or EP cost).

a. plate cost

b. T-bone steak from the butcher at
$4.50 per Ib

c. Cost after accounting for percent yield

da ‘9‘dV'‘G‘da e

AP cost
yield
Ex 3.6: You purchase 8 Ibs of apples at $2.99/lb. What is your total AP cost?

EP cost = multiply

9
xX 8 lb = $23.92
lb $

Total AP cost = AP cost per unit x AP quantity =

After peeling and coring, you end up with 6 Ibs of apples, giving you yield of 75%. What is your EP
cost per Ib?

AP cost per unit _ $2.99/lb
Yield ~ 0.75

EP cost per lb = = $3.99

Does it make sense that our EP cost is greater than our AP cost? Why or why not?

Ex 3.7: You purchase 40 qts of sliced canned peaches for $40.79. Yield for draining the peaches is
90%. What is the AP cost per unit?

40.79
40 qt

AP cost per unit = = $1.02 per qt

Did you need to use all of the information in this question? No! Don’t let extra information confuse you.

Calculations and Formulas 34
© 2022 Veritense™

Ex 3.8: You purchase 5 Ib 2 oz of strip steak with a 50% yield for $5.99/lb. What is the total EP
cost?

In Ex 3.3 you calculated EP quantity of 41 oz from the AP quantity of 82 oz. Now, calculate total EP
cost.

$5.99 lb gan
lb 160z POT %

74
X 82 oz

$0.3
Total AP cost = AP cost per unit x AP quantity =
= $30.67

AP cost _ $30.67
Yield — 0.50

EP cost = = $61.34

You paid $30.67 for the 5 lb 2 oz of streak but the total EP cost after prep is really $61.34.

ls there another way you could have calculated EP cost in this problem?

Ex 3.9: Your holiday dinner budget for turkey is $100. Yield for a whole turkey after cooking is
90%. Your vendor has 15-pound turkeys available for $49 each. Can you afford to feed 45 people
at 8 oz each with your budget?

You calculated how many turkeys you need to buy in Ex 3.4 by calculating EP quantity and then using
yield to calculate AP quantity.

EP quantity = 45 servings x = 360 oz

serving

EP quantity 360 0z
yield 0.90

AP quantity = = 400 oz

turkey
15 lbs

= 25 lbs;25 lbs EP Xx

lb
4000z EP x = 1.67 turkeys
16 oz

~ 2 turkeys
The new information is that the AP cost per unit is $49 per turkey.

$49
turkey

Total AP cost = AP cost per unit x AP quantity = x 2 turkeys = $98

Yes, you can just afford the 2 turkeys with your budget.
Now, calculate the total EP cost and EP cost per serving and per ounce (for fun).

AP cost _ $98 = $108.89
Yield 0.90 ‘

EP cost =

EP cost _ $108.99

servings 45 = $2.42

EP cost per serving =

Calculations and Formulas 35
© 2022 Veritense™

EPcost —_ $108.89 $108.89
EP quantity ~ 45*80z 3600z

EP cost per ounce = = $0.30

Your EP cost per ounce is $0.30/oz. What is your AP cost per ounce?

We wouldn't use the 400 oz AP because that is technically 1.67 turkeys, and we are purchasing 2
turkeys.

AP quantity = 2 turk 15 Ibs 1602 _ 480
quantity = 2 turkeys x turkey * Ib = oz
AP cost $98

AP cost per ounce = = $0.20

AP quantity ~ 480 oz

Practice Calculations

EQ1. As foodservice manager, you order 50 pounds of potatoes for $12 total. After peeling,
chopping, and boiling, the edible portion is 38 pounds. What is the edible portion cost per
pound?

EQ2. How much hamburger do you need to purchase to cook three hundred 3-ounce patties
with 20% shrinkage?

EQ3. An 8 lb roast costs $2.79 per pound and has EP of 65%. What is the AP cost?

EQ4. An 18 Ib ready-to-cook turkey is purchased at $0.68 per pound. After cooking and slicing
(handling), it weighs 9.9 pounds. What is the edible portion cost per pound?

EQ5. You need twenty 4-ounce hamburger patties for an upcoming catering event. The
hamburger meat has 50% yield. How much ground beef should you purchase?

EQ6. Your chef needs 45 pounds of beef for an upcoming event, so he submits a requisition
order for 45 pounds of beef. You check the recipe and see that the 45 pounds is actually the
EP, not the AP. You know that the beef has a 67% yield. How much should the chef actually
request for this recipe?

EQ7. You need 125 two-ounce portions of bacon for breakfast meals this week. Given 25%
shrinkage, how many pounds of bacon should be purchased to cover 125 portions?

Calculations and Formulas 36
© 2022 Veritense™

Selling Price

Selling price can be calculated in several ways, but the main idea is, “How much will you sell
this item for, given how much it costs to make it?” and/or, “How much will you sell this item for,
given how much profit you want to generate?”

Cost to make per unit

Selling Price = Food Cost (decimal)

Example 4.1: You spend $0.75 to create one portion of wings. You have a 30% food cost — what should
the selling price be?

Cost to make per unit $0.75

Food Cost (decimal) — 0.30 = $2.50

Selling Price =

You can re-arrange this first selling price formula to get the formulas for food cost percentage and cost to
make per unit. Try it:

Food Cost =
Cost to make per unit = x

Cost to make per unit

Food Cost = Selling Price
Cost to make per unit = Selling Price x Food Cost

If you're having trouble rearranging the formula, go back to the basic math review section. You'll need to
move denominators to the other side by multiplying both sides by it.

You can also calculate selling price using markup factor and prime cost.
Selling Price = Markup Factor x Prime Cost
where Prime Cost = Raw Food Cost ($) + Labor Cost($)

The formula you use for selling price depends on the information you're given. It’s important to
understand that selling price will always be more than food cost, and thus, you need to multiply so that
you increase the price. You'll also need to know how to calculate the other items in the formula, such as
prime cost or labor cost.

Selling Price = Markup Factor Xx Raw Food Cost

Calculations and Formulas 37
© 2022 Veritense™

Markup Factor

Markup factors can be calculated in several ways but will either incorporate both food cost and
labor cost, or food cost alone.

Markup Factor = Food Cost

1

Markup Factor = ———_——___—_—____
arkup actor = Food Cost + Labor Cost

If you’re given food cost as a percent, you can convert it to a decimal or you can use 100
instead of 1 in the numerator. Note that “food cost” and “labor cost” in the markup factor formula
is not the actual dollar amount but is food cost percent/100 and labor cost percent/100 (divide
by 100 to get the decimal, or use 100 / food cost percent + labor cost percent). If it was the
dollar amount, the markup factor would be the same as 1 / Prime Cost.

How do you know if you need to include food cost or food cost and labor cost? If you’re only
given one on the exam, you can only calculate one

Example 4.2: If food cost is 23% and raw food cost is $0.25:

Can you calculate markup factor? Yes, with food cost alone.
Can you calculate prime cost? No, we don’t have labor cost.

Calculate selling price using the selling price formula that requires markup factor and raw food cost, but
not labor cost or prime cost.

1

Food Cost 023° ’®

Markup Factor =

Selling Price = Markup Factor X Raw Food Cost = 4.3478 x $0.25
= $1.09

So, the cost of the food item was $0.25 and we are going to charge $1.09 for it.

Calculate markup factor for the following items.

e Prime rib — Food cost 33%, labor cost 5%
e Pizza — Food cost 12%, labor cost 26%
e Steak entrée — Food cost 42%

Calculations and Formulas 38
© 2022 Veritense™

Prime Cost

Prime cost is the combination of raw food cost and labor cost, that is, the cost of goods
purchased and the cost to make the final product. In contrast to markup factor, prime cost uses
food cost and labor cost in dollar values. In the earlier selling price formulas, there was a value
for “cost to make”. When we have the necessary information to calculate prime cost, prime cost
replaces “cost to make”.

Prime Cost = Raw Food Cost ($) + Labor Cost($)

Example 4.3: If raw food cost is $1.75, labor cost is $1.00, percent food cost is 30% and percent labor
cost is 52%, what will the selling price be?

Can you calculate markup factor? Yes, with food cost and labor cost.
Can you calculate prime cost? Yes, with raw food cost and labor cost.
How will you calculate selling price? With prime cost and markup factor.
1 1 1

Food Cost + Labor Cost ~ 0.30 + 0.52 ~ 0.82
= 1.2195

Markup Factor =

Prime Cost = Raw Food Cost + Labor Cost = $1.75 + $1.00 = $2.75
Selling Price = Markup Factor x Prime Cost = 1.2195 x $2.75 = $3.35

Note that if you’re given labor cost in dollar amounts, you should use the selling price formula that
includes both markup factor and prime cost, rather than calculating markup factor with both food cost and
labor cost, and multiplying it by the raw food cost.

In the example above, if we weren't given labor cost of $1.00, we couldn't use the prime cost method.
Instead, we would use:

Selling Price = Markup Factor Xx Raw Food Cost
1

here Markup Factor = ——_—__—__
winere MAGTICED BGCLOY Food Cost + Labor Cost

we would end up with

Selling Price = 1.2195 x $1.75 = $2.13
instead of the answer above, $3.35. See if you can work out the markup factor formula to get 1.2195.
What if labor cost wasn't given to you in a dollar amount but in terms of how many minutes it
took at an hourly rate? For example, if you were told that the labor cost was 5 minutes at
$12/hour, you can calculate the labor cost per minute and multiply that by the minutes taken to
make the item

$12 1hr $12

hour * 60 min 60min $0.20 per min

$0.20 per minx 5 min = $1.00

Calculate labor cost for the following scenarios:
10 minutes at $10/hour 2 minutes at $12/hour 8 minutes at $11.75/hour

Calculations and Formulas 39
© 2022 Veritense™

Example 4.4: Raw food cost is $2.50, labor cost is 30 minutes at $14/hour. Calculate prime cost.

Prime Cost = Raw Food Cost + Labor Cost

Labor Cost = x22" = 34 = $0.233/ min x 30 min = $7.00

hour 60min 60

Prime Cost = Raw Food Cost + Labor Cost = $2.50 + $7.00 = $9.50

What would the prime cost be if the labor cost was 2 hours at $14/hour?

Example 4.5: You make 25 plates for an awards dinner at $15 a plate. You paid 6 waitstaff $20/hour for 3
hours and 4 kitchen staff $15/hour for 6 hours. Calculate prime cost. Try it on your own before going
through the calculations below.

Prime Cost = Raw Food Cost + Labor Cost
$20 $15
Labor Cost = (x 3 hours x 6 staff) + (——x 6 hours x 4 staff)

= 360 + 360 = $720
Prime Cost = Raw Food Cost + Labor Cost = $15(25) + $720 = $375 + $720 = $1,095

The first step is to calculate labor cost. Note that we're not converting labor cost per hour into labor cost

per minute because the employees worked full hours. For food cost, note that we’re given the number of
plates and the cost per plate. If you were given the total cost, you would plug that in. Don’t get tripped up
if a question gives you the planned budget per plate and the actual amount spent. You'll want to use the
actual amount spent because you are calculating the prime cost after the fact.

Practice Calculations
$Q1. If food cost is 22% and raw food cost is $0.12, what should the selling price be?

$Q2. If food cost is 22%, raw food cost is $0.12, and labor cost is $1.75, what should
the selling price be?

SQ3. If labor cost is 4 minutes at $8/hour, percent food cost is 30%, percent labor cost
is 41%, and raw food cost is $1.80, what should the selling price be?

Calculations and Formulas 40
© 2022 Veritense™

Calculating Profitability and Popularity

You'll learn more about menu planning and optimizing profitability by assessing popularity when
you study Food Service Logistics. However, there are key calculations that you'll need to know
and you can practice them here.

Popularity index and profit contribution are 2 measures that can be used to assess the success
of different menu items and make changes to increase profit.

Popularity is assessed by the number of units sold and isn’t tied into profit. You can sell 100
units of item A and 10 units of Item B (for ten times the price of Item A), and no matter how
much profit you make from Item B, Item A will still be more popular.

units sold

Popularity index = total units sold

Profitability can be calculated several ways, and the formula you use will depend on what
you're given in the question. You can calculate profit for a single unit of an item sold (also called
the unit price profit), or you can multiply that unit price profit by total items sold and then divide
it by its contribution to total profits (percent profit contribution). To calculate “profit”, you'll see
either of these:

Unit Price Profit = Selling Price — Food Cost
Profit =item profit xX units sold

With percent profit contribution, you can see how popularity (the number of items sold) plays
into profitability, which makes sense given that the strategies earlier on involved increasing
overall sales in order to increase profitability.

Unit item profit _ Selling Price—Food Cost

Percent Profit Contribution = - -
Total profit Total profit

You can also calculate food cost percentage.

Food Cost

Food Cost P t = ——_—_
000 NOSE ET EETEAGE Selling Price

Did you catch that food cost percentage is the unit price profit formula rearranged?

Since you’ve learned about markup factors as well, you can imagine that you might include
labor cost along with food cost when calculating profit. “Contribution margin” is another term for
profit. Note that profit, profit contribution, and contribution margin all sound very similar but
aren't always the same thing.

The questions you will see on the RD exam will ask you to choose what strategy should be used
for different menu types, or it will ask you to calculate which items on a list are most profitable or
popular.

Calculations and Formulas 41
© 2022 Veritense™

You may need to incorporate other foodservice calculation concepts like prime cost, food cost,

edible portion, as purchased, etc.

A key part of getting foodservice calculation questions correct is doing all of the steps. If you
stop too early in problem solving, you may come up with an incorrect answer (but it might still be
in the answer choices to trip you up). Writing out each step while including units and then going

back to the question to see what it’s asking for; will help you ace these questions.

This problem will walk you through calculating unit profit, total item profit, food cost percentage,
and percent profit contribution. Remember that unit profit and total item profit are 2 terms often

called “profit”.

Step 1: Calculate profit for each item by subtracting food cost from selling price.

| Selling Price Units Sold Unit Profit
$19.50 $6.50
Chicken parmesan $18.00 $7.50

soso | $250 | 450~—~*
Veggie Lasagna | $1020 | $1.25.~| —200~—*

item profit for all items on the menu.

Step 2: Multiply the unit profit by the number of units sold for total item profit. Then sum total |

pe Selling Price Units Sold Unit Profit

$19.50 $650 | 175 | $13
Chicken parmesan $18.00 $7.50 $10.50

Veggie Lasagna $10.20 $1.25
a

$8.95

soso | s250 | 450 ~+|  ~97~—~*S

Which item had the highest total profit in this example?

Total Item
Profit

Write out the difference in unit profit and total item profit. Think about how you'll know which one

to use when a question asks just for profit.

Calculations and Formulas 42
© 2022 Veritense™

Step 3: Calculate food cost percentage by dividing Food Cost by Selling Price. Food cost
percentage answers the question, “how much of the selling price covers the food cost?” A lower
food cost percentage means you're selling the item for a high price relative to the food cost.
Compare Veggie Lasagna’s food cost percentage to its unit profit — why doesn’t it have the
highest unit profit?

Percentage

[——Pimers | —staso ~~ Cd|SCCY
[Chicken parmesan | sa00 | $750 | 200 ~=«4 SS
[Hamburger | soso $280 | 4s0~—=«SS
[Veggie Lasagna | sto20| $125 | 200~=S«SCSSCS

Step 4: Calculate percent profit contribution by dividing total item profit for each item by the
profit total.

% Profit
pe Contribution
| _Primerib | $1950 | $650
[Veggie Lasagna_| $1020 ~+| $1.25 —

Step 5: Calculate popularity of each item by dividing the units sold by total sales. To calculate
total sales, add up all units sold from the menu.

Po Selling Price Units Sold Popularity Index
p Primers ‘| _‘$19.50 $6.50
Chicken parmesan $18.00

$9.50 $2.50
Veggie Lasagna | 1020 | $1.25 | 200

po tote

Which item is most popular?
Which item contributes the most profit to total profits?

Which item has the lowest food cost percentage? What does this mean? Does this item have
the highest unit profit? Why or why not?

Calculations and Formulas 43
© 2022 Veritense™

Profitability Example

Two items with the same food cost percent can have different unit profits due to different selling
prices. You can rearrange the food cost percent formula to solve for selling price or for food
cost.

Food Cost P : _ Food Cost Food Cost P ; __ Food Cost
008 (OSE REPCEMAGE = Selling Price 00 OE NWAIES Selling Price

Food Cost = Selling Price x Food Cost Percentage

Selling Food Cost Fe ood Cost | Unit Profit
Price Percent

Item A

Food Cost = Selling Price x Food Cost Percentage = $20 x 0.10 = $2
Unit Price Profit = Selling Price — Food Cost = $20 — $2 = $18

ltem B

Food Cost = Selling Price x Food Cost Percentage = $5 x 0.10 = $0.50
Unit Price Profit = Selling Price — Food Cost = $5 — $0.50 = $4.50
Practice Calculation

PQ1. These numbers are for each item sold in a hospital cafeteria over a single week. Calculate
food cost percentage, percent profit contribution, and popularity index for each item.

[TY Saaing Price Units Sold
$8.50 $2.50

$3.00 $0.50
$9.50 g250 | 350
Meatball Sub $6.50 $3.15

Use the previous examples to walk yourself through each calculation and then check your
numbers in the answers section. You'll also want to check that you used the right formulas
because you may have gotten the right answer but not the right way.

A question on the RD exam will likely have you calculate several of these measures and then
ask which item was most profitable or had the highest food cost percentage, etc. You still need
to go through the calculations to answer those questions.

Calculations and Formulas 44
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Calculation Answers

Cans

You have a recipe written using #2 cans but want to use #10 cans. The recipe calls for 8
number #2 cans of food. How many #10 cans will you need?

#2 can = 2.5 cups
8 0z
8 (#2 cans) = 8x 2.5 cups = 20 cups x cup = 160 oz

32 oz
10 can =3 qts X qt = 9602

160 07 _ 1.667 (#10 = 2 (#10
Q60r 7 ( cans) = 2 ( cans)

You could also convert the #2 can into fluid ounces from the beginning:

#2can = 2.5 cups x= = 20 oz 8 (#2 cans) = 8 X 20 oz = 160 oz
cup

Break-even point

Joe’s Diner has the following financial numbers for the past 6 months. Calculate the break-even
point.

Step 1: Go back to where the fixed costs and variable costs are described. Write whether each
item is a fixed cost, sales, or variable cost in the far-right blank column.

a
a
[Propery Taxes‘ sesco res

Step 2: Calculate totals for each category and record them below.

Total Sales $29,690

Variable Costs $27,660

Calculations and Formulas 45
© 2022 Veritense™

Step 3: Copy down the break-event point formula you'll use in this question.

Fixed costs

Variable costs
(1 ~ ( Sales ))

Formula 1:

Step 4: Calculate the break-even point.
First, calculate the denominator

Variable costs _ $27,660
Sales ~ $29,690

= 0.931627
Variable costs comprise about 4% of all sales.
1 — 0.931627 = 0.068373
Then we divide fixed costs by 1 — proportion of variable costs relative to sales.

$10,800

0.068373 = $157,957.09

Cost per meal

Your department is catering the hospital’s board meeting lunch next week. There will be 30
people in attendance and the cost of food purchased for the event is $820. Your supervisor

told you last week the budget for the event was $25 per meal, maximum. Are you over or
under pervisor’s budget? By how much?

Over, $2.33 Answer: A. First calculate the total cost per
Under, $2.33 meal using what was spent and then

Over, $70 determine if it was over or under budget.
Under, $70

aoop

$820 spent

30 meals
$27.33 per meal — $25 budget = $2.33 over budget

Cost per meal = = $27.33 per meal

Depreciation

Your department purchased a new bread oven for $16,000. The salvage value is estimated at
$600 and the expected usable life is 11 years. Calculate the yearly depreciation.

Cost of Equipment — Salvage value
Years of Usable Life

_ $16,000 — $600

~ i1years

Annual depreciation =

= $1,400.00 per year

Calculations and Formulas 46
© 2022 Veritense™

Edible Portion, As Purchased, and Yield

EQ1. As foodservice manager, you order 50 pounds of potatoes for $12 total. After peeling,
chopping, and boiling, the edible portion is 38 pounds. What is the edible portion cost per
pound?

AP cost _ $12
EPamount 38

EP cost per pound = = $0.316 or $0.32 per pound

You paid $12 for 50 pounds of potatoes, or $0.24 per pound (AP price per Ib; $12 is AP cost).
For this question, we want to know what the new food cost per pound is, given that we paid $12
for 50 pounds of potatoes (and that doesn’t change) and have 38 pounds of potatoes to use to
feed people. You can imagine that if a recipe calls for 50 pounds of potatoes (prepped), you
would need to purchase more than 50 pounds in order to have what you need. Similarly, you
may need to calculate the EP cost when tallying up food cost and profits later on.

EQ2. How many pounds of hamburger do you need to purchase to cook three hundred 3-ounce
patties with 20% shrinkage?

Yield % = 100 — 20% shrinkage = 80% yield

900 oz

——— = 56.25 lbs
16 oz per lb

: 30z _
300 patties x Sach = 900 oz
56.25 lbs / 80% yield = 70 lbs meat to purchase

First calculate the percent yield using the percent shrinkage given. If your hamburger meat will
shrink by 20%, that means that you'll end up with 80% of the raw meat that you buy. You also
need to account for portion size (3 0z) and portion number (300) to get the total amount you
need for the recipe, and then back-calculate to the amount you need to purchase. Note that you
need to purchase 70 lbs of meat to get the 57 Ibs cooked it will take to make your 300
hamburger patties.

EQ3. An 8 lb roast costs $2.79 per pound and has EP of 65%. What is the AP cost?

AP price = 8 lbs x $2.79 per lb = $22.32 spent
You're given the AP cost per pound ($2.79/Ib) and asked for the AP cost. To calculate AP cost,
you just multiply the amount per pound times the amount you bought. You don’t need to account
for EP to answer this question.

EQ4. An 18 lb ready-to-cook turkey is purchased at $0.68 per pound. After cooking and slicing

(handling), it weighs 9.9 pounds. What is the edible portion cost per pound?

Calculations and Formulas 47
© 2022 Veritense™

EP cost lb AP cost
r lb = ————_
Cost BS EP weight
$0.68 _ APcost _ $12.24 _
AP cost = ——x 18 lb purchased = $12.24 EP cost per lb = Foon = oops = 3 U24 per lb

lb
First, we calculate total AP cost by multiplying the AP cost per Ib by the amount purchased.
Then, we calculate the EP cost per Ib using the 9.9 pounds given. Another question may give
you percent loss instead so that you have to calculate the EP weight yourself.

EQ5. You need twenty 4-ounce hamburger patties for an upcoming catering event. The
hamburger meat has 50% yield. How much ground beef should you purchase?

Total EP amount = 40z X 20 servings = 80 oz EP

80 oz

——— = 5 lbs / 0.50 yield = 10 lb h
16 oz per lb s/ yle S purchase

First, you need to calculate how much edible portion weight you will need and convert it to
pounds. Take note that you will need 5 pounds of cooked beef to make the patties, and so you
should expect that you need to buy more. Thus, you divide by the percent yield rather than
multiplying. If you were given a question that told you that you purchased 10 Ibs of ground beef
raw, and that it has 50% yield, and were then asked how many 4-oz patties you could make, it
would be working this problem in reverse.

Calculations and Formulas 48
© 2022 Veritense™

EQ6. Your chef needs 45 pounds of beef for an upcoming event, so he submits a requisition
order for 45 pounds of beef. You check the recipe and see that the 45 pounds is actually the
EP, not the AP. You know that the beef has a 67% yield. How much should the chef actually
request for this recipe?

45 lbs for recipe
0.67 yield
This question is a good example of how to go from EP needed for a recipe to AP weight. The
chef will need more than 45 pounds of beef raw, so you will divide by the yield rather than
multiplying.

EQ7. You need 125 two-ounce portions of bacon for breakfast meals this week. Given 25%
shrinkage, how many pounds of bacon should be purchased to cover 125 portions?

125x20z __ 2500z _ 15.625 lbs

16 oz/lb ~ 16 oz/lb = 15.625 lbs (1-025) yield = 20.833 lbs to purchase
Always start with calculating the total amount you'll need using the number of portions and the
portion size. You may even be given the number of servings with a certain scoop size, and so
you would need to know how many oz is in a scoop. Just like in the last example, if we’re going
from EP weight to AP weight, we need to divide by yield to get the larger amount to order. If this
was a multiple-choice question, we would need to round up and select 21 Ibs to purchase
because if we purchased 20 Ibs, we would not have enough.

= 67.16 lbs to purchase

Selling Price

Hem Food Cost % Labor Cost % 3 Factor
Pizza

Steak entrée aX

. wv, 1 1 1
Prime Rib: Markup Factor = ————————————_ = = — = 2.6316
Food Cost+Labor Cost 0.33+0.05 0.38

1 —-—_1_~_4 ~23616

Pizza Markup Factor = —————————_ =
Food Cost+Labor Cost 0.12+0.26 0.387

Steak entrée Markup Factor = —~—— = —- = 2.381
Food Cost 0.42

Calculate labor cost for the following scenarios
10 minutes at $10/hour: = $10 _thr__ _$10__ ¢9 16667 ner minx 10 min = $1.67

hour 60min 60 min

2 minutes at $12/hour: S12 y thr _ 812 _ $9 99 per minx 2 min = $0.40

hour“. 60min 60min

8 minutes at $11.75/hour: 9 $11.75) ihr _ $11.75
hour 60 min 60 min

= $0.195 per minx 8 min = $1.57

Calculations and Formulas 49
© 2022 Veritense™

Selling Price

$Q1. If food cost is 22% and raw food cost is $0.12, what should the selling price be?

—1 = 1 = 4545455 Selling Price = Markup Factor
Food Cost 0.22 x Raw Food Cost
= 4.545455 x $0.12 = $0.55

Calculate the markup factor by dividing 1 by the food cost percent in decimal format, and then
multiply that markup factor by the raw food cost.

$Q2. If food cost is 22%, raw food cost is $0.12, and labor cost is $1.75, what should the selling
price be?

1 1
Food Cost 0.22

Markup Factor =

Markup Factor = = 4.545455

Prime Cost = Raw Food Cost ($) + Labor Cost($) = $0.12 + $1.75 = $1.87
Selling Price = Markup Factor x Prime Cost = 4.545455 x $1.87 = $8.50

Note that we don’t use the markup factor formula with labor cost because we’re given labor cost
in a dollar amount, not percent. We use the same markup factor as before but incorporate labor

cost into our selling price by using the formula that multiplies markup factor by prime cost, rather
than raw food cost.

SQ3. If labor cost is 4 minutes at $8/hour, percent food cost is 30%, percent labor cost is 41%,
and raw food cost is $1.80, what should the selling price be?

Labor cost ($) = 2x —“~ = —8_ = $0.133/min x 4min = $0.533 In this example, since you're
hr 60min §=—60 min given both labor cost in dollars
1 1 1 and percent, you'll want to use
Markup Factor = ~~ yapor Cost = 0308041 O71 1408451 the markup factor formula that
has labor cost percent in the
Prime Cost = Raw Food Cost ($) + Labor Cost($) = $1.80 + $0.533 = denominator and the selling
$2.33 price formula that uses prime
cost (which uses labor cost in
Selling Price = Markup Factor x Prime Cost = 1.408451 x $2.33 = dollars).
$3.29
Profit

Step 1: Calculate profit for each item by subtracting food cost from selling price. For example,
the unit profit for prime rib will be $19.50 - $6.50 = $13. Repeat for the other items.

Prime rib: $13; Chicken parmesan: $10.50; Hamburger: $7; Veggie Lasagna: $8.95

Calculations and Formulas 50
© 2022 Veritense™

Step 2: Multiply the unit profit by the number of units sold for total item profit. Then sum total
item profit for all items on the menu. For prime rib, calculate total item profit by multiplying 175
units by $13 profit per unit = $2,275.

Prime rib: $2,275; Chicken parmesan: $2,100; Hamburger: $3,150; Veggie Lasagna: $1,790
Total: $9,315

What item had the highest total profit in this example? Hamburger - $3,150 is greater than
the other total item profits.

Write out the difference in unit profit and total item profit. Think about how you’ll know
which one to use when a question asks just for profit. Unit profit accounts for the selling
price and food cost but not the items sold. You can’t calculate an items contribution to total
sales without considering units sold. Total unit profit accounts for both unit profit (how far apart
are your selling price and food cost) and the number of units sold (popularity).

Step 3: Calculate food cost percentage by dividing Food Cost by Selling Price. For prime rib,
divide food cost $6.50 by selling price $19.50. Food cost percentage answers the question,
“how much of the selling price covers the food cost?” A lower food cost percentage means
you're selling the item for a high price relative to the food cost. Compare Veggie Lasagna’s food
cost percentage to its unit profit — why doesn’t it have the highest unit profit?

Prime rib: 33%; Chicken parmesan: 42%; Hamburger: 26%; Veggie Lasagna: 12%

Step 4: Calculate percent profit contribution by dividing total item profit for each item by the
profit total.

Prime rib: $2,275 / $9,315 =0.24 Hamburger: $3,150 / $9,315 = 0.34
Chicken parmesan: $2,100 / $9,315 = 0.23 Veggie Lasagna: $1,790 / $9,315 = 0.19

Step 5: Calculate popularity of each item by dividing the units sold by total sales. To calculate
total sales, add up all units sold from the menu. For prime rib, divide 175 units sold by 1,025
total sales and multiply by 100 for a 17% popularity index.

Prime rib: 17%; Chicken parmesan: 20%; Hamburger: 44%; Veggie Lasagna: 20%
Total units sold: 1,025

Which item is most popular? Hamburger. It makes up the largest percent of total sales.

What item contributes the most profit to total profits? Hamburger. It makes up the largest percent of
profits.

What item has the lowest food cost percentage? What does this mean? Does this item have the
highest unit profit? Why or why not? The Veggie lasagna — the profit margin is highest on this item and
it is being sold for a high price relative to the cost of producing it. This item does not have the highest unit
price because unit price is on an absolute scale, but food cost percentage is relative to the actual selling
price and actual food cost. The same food cost percent of an item with a low selling price will translate
into lower unit profit than an item with a higher selling price.

Calculations and Formulas 51
© 2022 Veritense™

Profitability and Popularity Practice Question

PQ1. These numbers are for each item sold in a hospital cafeteria over a single week. Calculate
food cost percentage, percent profit contribution, and popularity index for each item.

Selling Food Total Item Profit
Price Cost
$8.50 | $2.50 | 250 — $8.50 - $2.50 = $6 $6 x 250 = $1,500
$3.00 | $0.50 $3.50 - $0.50 = $2.50 | $2.50 x 100 = $250

$9.50 $2.50 $9.50 - $2.50 = $7 $7 x 350 = $2,450
Meatball Sub | $6.50 $3.15 $6.50 - $3.15 = $3.35 | $3.35 x 175 = $586.25

a Popularity Index Percent Profit Contribution | Food Cost Percentage

Calculations and Formulas 52
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your
first pass at applying the knowledge you’ve read and practiced in example calculations in a
question-and-answer format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your
notes. Because these questions are intended to be used as a guide to apply your knowledge
and develop your critical thinking skills, not a test, and because the answers are in this
document, there is no answer sheet.

1.

2.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Activity-based budgeting is what type of budget?

What are the differences between a baseline budget, a zero-based budget, and an
incremental budget?

Which type of budget accounts for changes in business volume using rate per unit of
activity? Which type allocates a fixed amount of funding per business activity regardless of
activity level?

Which type of budget can be used to measure efficiency? Bonus: Why is that?

What is a primary cost driver?

Incremental budgets can be simpler than zero-based budgets but they can also be
inefficient. Why?

Compare and contrast zero-based budgeting and value proposition budgeting.
Write out the formula for the current ratio. Think through why a current ratio greater than 1
would indicate a positive ability to pay bills when due, while a current ratio less than 1 would

indicate the opposite.

Write out the formula for gross profit and net profit. How are they related? Where do
operating costs come in?

Which types of assets might a foodservice operation own that would accumulate
depreciation?

What is the purpose of cost-benefit analysis?
Compare and contrast cost-benefit analysis, value analysis, and value-added research.
Does increasing the amount of money spent on a product always equate to added value?

How is quality often defined in food service? How would increased quality decrease costs?

Calculations and Formulas 53
© 2022 Veritense™

15. What are the 5 factors that affect quality?

16. What does it mean when a product is “value-added”? Can you think of an example other
than pre-cut vegetables?

17. What is the purpose of calculating the break-even point?

18. Describe the relationship between monthly food cost, inventory, cost of production, COGS,
and net income.

19. Why might you want to forecast future sales volume?

20. List the 3 main types of forecasting.

21. What are some challenges with sizing up recipes for large service food systems?
22. What factors do you need to consider in make-or-buy decision making?

23. What is the difference between COGS and monthly food cost?

24. Why would management try to keep COGS low? What are the components of COGS that
you could attempt to decrease in your budget?

25. Define edible portion and as purchased price. Why would the food cost of an item differ
when raw versus cooked?

26. Write out the different formulas for calculating selling price, as well as the formulas for their
components, such as prime cost and markup factor. What key things do you need to

remember when performing these calculations for the exam?

27. What 2 measures can be used to assess the performance of menu items and plan changes
to increase profit? Which measure is tied to profit?

28. While popularity isn’t tied to profit, it contributes to profitability. Write out the formula for
percent profit contribution to illustrate this, then explain in words.

29. How could two food items with the same food cost percent have different unit profits?

Calculations and Formulas 54
