FOOD SERVICE LOGISTICS

FOR THE REGISTERED DIETITIAN NUTRITIONIST EXAMINATION

a VERITENSE™ product

WRITTEN BY
Bailey DeBarmore, PhD MHS RDN LDN
Creator of the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™

Version: Oct 1, 2022

© 2022 Veritense™

Table of Contents

Menu Developme nt ............ceceeccceseteeceeecceseseeeeeeceeeeeseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeceeeeeeaeeeeeceseeeeeeaeeeseeeeeeeeeseeaeseeseeeeeeenaes 3
Menu Planning Principles ..............ccccceecseseeeseseeeeeeeeceeeeeeeaeeeceseaaeeeeseeaeeeseneaeeeseseseeeseneaeesseneaeeeseneeeeeeeaeaeees 3
Types Of M@nusS 2.0.0.0... cceceeseeesceeneeeneceeaeeeaeeeaeceaeeeneeeneeeeaeeaesaeeeseecseeecaeseaeseaeeseeeneeesaeeeaeseaeeeaeeeeeeeneeeeaeeeaeees 4
Profitability and Popularity ............c cece cece eecseeeeeeeeecseeseaeeesseesesaeeceeeeeeaeeeesaeesceeeeseeeseeaeeccaseceaeeseeaeeeaeees 5
Finance And FOOdServiCe ............cccccceeceeseeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeseeeesaeeeeeeseaeeeeeaeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeseseeeeeeaeeeseeeseneeeeeaeeeeees 9

Procurement and Production .0..........cccceesccceeeeeseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeaeeeeeeeseseeeseaeeeeseaeeeaeeeseseeeseeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeneeeees 12
Contract implementation ............ccecceceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceseeseecseeeseaeeaeeeeaeeneeeneeenaeseaeseseeeaaeeaeeaeseaeseneseaaeenaes 13
Specification DevelopMent ............:cceceeeceseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneceeeeseeeeeeeeeeaeenaeenaeseaeeeseseseseeaeenaceaeeeneseaesenaeenaes 13
Group PUrChASING ..........eseeeeseeeeeeeeeneeeeseeeeaeeeseseeeceeseeaeesenaesecaeeseaaeesaaeseaeesecaeeeseeseceeseeaeseneeeseneeeeeaeeseaeees 13
Prime Vendor Agreement ............ccccecseceeeseeeseeeeeneeeeeeaeeeeeseaecesaeesesaeecesaeeeseeseeaeeeseeeseeeeenaesenaeeseneeeeneaeeaes 14
Purchasing ProcesS...........ccccccscecseseseeseeceeseeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseaesecaeeseaeeceeaeseeeseaeecseeeeseaeeeeaesenaeeseneeeeeeaeeeaes 15
RECEIVING POCESS .........ceeeeeesceeseeeeeteeeeeeceeeneeeseseeeeeeeseaeeseeaeeecaeeseaeeceeaeseaeeseaueeeneeeeeeaeessaesenueeseneeeeeeaeeeaes 15
IVOMOLY 00... eeeececeseeeseeeeeeteeeeeneeeseeeeeeaeeseeaeeeeeeseseeseeaeecaeesesaeeecaeesesaescnsaeseaeesesueecseeeseeeseeaeseeeeseneeeeneaeeeaes 16
Foodservice Production SYSteMS ..0.........ccceccccccccseeceeesseeeeecesaeececeeaeececseaeeeseceseeeseeceaeeceeseseeceeeueeeeeesaaeees 21
Food Distribution and Service SysteEMS...........c cece ccccceeeceeceseeeeseseeeeeceeseeeeecceeeeceesueeceeseaeeceeeueeesensaeeees 23
Practice Questions (Group 1) ........ cece ccecceeeeeseeeeseeeeeaeeeeeaesecaeeceseeeceeaeseaeeseeaeeesaeeeeeeeseeeeseaeeeseeeeeeeaeeaes 26
Practice Questions (Group 1) ANSWETS .0.......::ccceccceceeseeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeceseeseaeesesueessaeeeseaeeseeaeecaeeseeeeeeeeeeeaes 29
EqQUIPMENS.......... cece ccccccceceseeeeeeeseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeceeceesueeeseececeeeesesaeeeeeeseeeeeeeeaeeeeceeceeeeeeaeseeeesuceeeeenaesaeeseeeeeeeeaea 34
Study Guide Questions (Equipment) ..............ccccce cece ceeeeeeceeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeaeseseeeeesaeeseaeseeeeseneeeeeseeseaeees 39
Study Guide Questions (ANSWETS)..........:cc:ccccceecceseeeceeeceeseeecaeeceseeeceeeecaeeeeaeesceeeeesaeeseeeeeeesseeeeecseeeeaeees 40
Facility Specifications ..........e eee ecceeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeceeseeseeeeaeesaeeseeeseesseeeseeesaeesaeeseeeseeesseeeeeeeeeeneeees 49
Safety oo. eee ccceceeeeeeeeseesseeeeeeeeeeeeesneeeseeeseeesueeeseeesuecenecsneceneeseeeseaeesaeeeseeeaeeenaeseaeseaeseeaseaeeaaeseaesenesenaeenaes 55
SAMitAtion oo... eee cece cecceeeeseeeseeeeeeeeceeeneeeeeeeeesuaeeseeesuecsneseneceneesseeseaesaeeesaeeaeeenaeseseseaeeenaseaeeaeenaesenesenaeeeaes 57
Sustainability 0.2... ee eee cceeseeceeeeeeeeeseeeseeeseeeeaeeeseesseeeseeeeeeceneeseecaesaesenaeeneeseaeseaeseaaeeaeeaaeeaeeeaeseaeseaaeenaes 59
Practice Questions (GrOUP 2) .......eeccceeeeeceeeeeneeeeeeseeeseeseeeesaeeeaeeeaeeseeeseeeneessaeeeaeseaeeseeeeneeseneseseseeeeeneeaes 61
Practice Questions (Group 2) ANSWEFS .........:ccccecceeseeeeseeeeeeeeeceeeseeeceeeseeeeneeeseeesaeeeneeseeesaeeseeeeeseneeeneeeaes 64

REPEFENCES 00... eee ceececeneeceneeeeeseeeseaeeenaeecesaeseneeeeaaeeseaeeecneeeeeaeeeneaesenaeeseseeeseaeeeeaeeeseseeeneeeeeeaeaseaseeneeeeeeeeeueeeees 69

Terms of use: Bailey DeBarmore is the creator and sole owner of the exclusive copyright to this study resource.
This publication may not be shared physically or electronically with anyone, manipulated, copied, reprinted and sold,
altered, or reproduced in any form or by any means without requesting further permission from the owner, Bailey
DeBarmore. This book is for personal use only by a single individual. It should not be distributed to a dietetic
internship class or otherwise used for academic purposes without discussing terms of use with the owner. By
purchasing this item, you agree to the Terms of Use outlined herein. To inquire about further permissions for this
document, including access for groups such as dietetic internship classes or graduate courses, contact the owner to
learn about your options.

Food Service Logistics 2
© 2022 Veritense™

Menu Development

Section Source (unless otherwise indicated)
e Gregoire MB, Spears MC. Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach. 9th ed. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson; 2016.

Menu Planning Principles
When it comes to putting together a menu, the manager should consider both profit and
aesthetics as they go hand in hand.

* Menu engineering: allows the manager to examine a menu item’s profitability and
popularity so that proactive planning, recipe changes, and selling price decisions can be
made. The menu can be re-engineered to encourage customers to buy certain items.

* Is it not a replacement for poor purchasing practices, food rotations, inventory waste,
or lack of standardized recipes that are increasing base food cost?

* Assess popularity by using the percent of total sales and profitability by using the
percent of profit — obviously, the more units of an item that sells, the more popular it
will be but the number of units sold will also contribute to the profitability.

* Menu planning principles: you want to have a variety of color, flavors, textures, and food
shapes

* You may have a question on the exam that gives you 4 different example meals and
asks which reflects “proper menu planning principles”. Visualize each option in terms
of color, flavor, texture, and food shapes.

¢ Flavors — you don’t want all spicy, all savory, or all sour
* Texture — you don’t want all tough, all crunchy, or all mushy
* Color — you don’t want all white or all brown

* Food shapes — you don’t want all round or all flat

Which of these meals follows menu planning principles?

A: Italian meatballs, whole B: Grilled chicken, mashed C: Steak, sautéed broccoli,
baby potatoes, roasted potatoes, roasted cauliflower, rice pilaf, vanilla frozen yogurt
brussels sprouts, fresh lemon sorbet

cherries

Food Service Logistics 3
© 2022 Veritense™

Types of Menus

There are different types of
menus and the menu type
impacts everything from
purchasing to production to
scheduling. '

Static Menu \

Static menu: does not change == =<. AF
daily or seasonally; typically = ce ee
grouped by appetizers, entrees, =
salads, soups, desserts, etc. tc Cycle Menu
Example: Red Lobster, TGIF,
Olive Garden, fast food chains

Du jour menu: has specials for
the day. Offers flexibility,
especially for small and busy restaurants; customizable each day and/or throughout the day and
may apply to a single, special item (Soup du jour) in conjunction with a static menu

Prix fixe menu (a.k.a. fixed price): may present an entire meal, or several options within each
meal category, for a single price

Table d’héte menu: a bit more upscale than prix fixe, may vary entrée price

A la carte menus: prices each food item separately. Instead of entrée items like steak
accompanied by a side salad and mashed potatoes, customers will order each item separately

Single-use menu: used once, such as that for a special event

Cycle menu: for each day of a cycle, the menu is different. The cycle then repeats on a regular
basis (usually weekly or monthly), covers variety with some control over purchasing, production,
and cost. Cycle menus save time and control food costs while still offering variety that can
incorporate seasonality, holidays, and USDA commodity foods. Using cycle menus is a more
efficient approach to plan menus, develop specifications, standardize purchasing procedures
and gives the ability to buy in bulk, as well as accounting for increased or decreased needs
based on the last cycle iteration (it reduces food waste, reduces storage cost, and keeps
appropriate stock). Staff familiarity with recipes also leads to efficient production.

e What benefits does a cycle menu offer?

Food Service Logistics 4
© 2022 Veritense™

What type of menu are the examples below?

Menu #1

Two eggs $3.50
Hotcake $2.00
French toast $2.00

Menu #2

Appetizer

Appetizer

House salad
Chicken tortilla soup

House salad
Chicken tortilla soup

Whole grain toast
Fruit cup
Yogurt and muesli
Coffee
Espresso

Dessert
Fresh orange juice $1.50
Flourless chocolate cake
Chilled apple juice $1.50 Lemon zest créme brulee

Almond-crusted halibut - $35
Pecan chicken - $35
Peppercorn steak - $45

Almond-crusted halibut
Pecan chicken
Peppercorn steak

Dessert

Flourless chocolate cake
Lemon zest creme brulee

Menu #1 is an example of an a /a carte menu because each item has its own price and you can
mix and match items.

Menu #2 is an example of a prix fixe menu because there is 1 price for the 3-course meal.

Menu #3 is a table d’héte menu because, like prix fixe, there is one main cost (not shown) but
the cost of the main meal (entrée) changes. A restaurant may decide to do this to account for
higher food costs associated with steak versus chicken.

Profitability and Popularity

Contribution margin indicates profitability and menu mix indicates popularity.
Classifying menu items

There are 4 types of menu items:

1) Plow horse — very popular but doesn't bring in a lot of money
2) Star —high in profit and high in sales

3) Puzzle — don’t sell much but profitable when it does

4) Dog — low profit and low sales

Plow horse — popular but not profitable

Popularity

*
ry

Items that are very popular but don’t bring in a lot of money — and

ef
gt

they are price sensitive. Customers are often aware of a typical price ow 1

Profitability high

and increasing the price to increase profit can reduce sales. An
example is pepperoni pizza at a pizza parlor — the waitstaff doesn’t
have to promote them to get sales, but they don’t bring in as much profit as other items. You
might try changing the portion size to decrease the food cost. Similar to dogs, plow horse items
might bring in customers and then you hope they order additional items. One example is steak —

Food Service Logistics 5
© 2022 Veritense™

a whole family comes in because someone in the family wants steak, or people see steak ona
restaurant menu and feel it is a classy place.

To create more profitable versions of these popular staples, you can:
e Improve appearance

e Decrease portion size (easiest to do)

e Decrease food cost

Star — popular and profitable

Items high in profit and high in sales — they are very popular and not price sensitive. In the
bartending world, margaritas are a classic star. Customers will ask for the drink without
checking the price, in contrast to bottled beer where they might ask to see the menu for pricing
to decide. You can take advantage of stars by increasing the price because it won't translate
into lost sales.

e Don’t mess with these items

e Keep them consistent and continue promoting them, such as with chef specials

Puzzle — not popular but profitable

These are dishes that you don’t sell very many of but when you do, you make a lot of money
(low popularity but high profitability). You try to increase the number of units sold by jazzing up
the item description, adding a photo, highlighting it as a special, moving it to the first or last item
of a category on the written menu, or adjusting the price. For example, it’s typical for a fine
dining restaurant to have steak on its menu. If their steak dish is a puzzle, they wouldn't just
remove it but instead, try to increase the units sold. If it's not a staple item, you might consider
removing it from the menu.

Try to improve popularity by:
e Reducing the selling price
e Featuring it as a special
e Giving it top priority on the menu
e Offer a smaller portion size

Dog — not popular or profitable

These are dishes with low profit and low sales numbers. Relative to what you can charge, “dog
items” cost a lot of money to make and you don't sell enough units to offset that extra food cost.
However, in some cases, you keep them on your menu because these might be unique items
that bring people into your restaurant whether or not they will order the item. You can increase
the price because those who do want to buy it won’t change their mind based on price.

To improve popularity or profitability:

e_ Assess if this item is customer specific - items on the children’s menu (chicken fingers,
mac and cheese, PB&J). Relegate to a “hidden” spot on the menu — children’s menus
are often on the back page in the bottom corner

e If not customer-specific, try increasing the selling price

Food Service Logistics 6
© 2022 Veritense™

Use the example on the below and the graph worksheet available in your RD exam toolkit or at
www.studysmartermethod.com to take notes on the 4 types of menu items and how you can
solve their associated issues.

Example: Joe’s Diner

Joe has been running Joe’s Diner which his grandparents started back in the 1950's. Joe’s
Diner is in a small college town and a popular place for locals and students alike. Below are 4
scenarios concerning Joe’s menu. Classify each one as a plow horse, star, puzzle, or dog and
write out why. These examples are intentionally vague and not reflective of a question you might
get on the exam. Instead, they are practice at identifying the different menu classifications in a
different way through active learning.

1. The Signature Italiano Sandwich is a lunch favorite at Joe’s Diner but not the most
profitable. Joe is trying to decide between swapping expensive Italian soppressota for
pepperoni to reduce food cost or serving a half-hoagie instead of a full-size sub.

2. Pizzas are offered on the Joe’s Diner menu but so are a lot of other Italian-American
favorites. When a group comes in looking for pizza, he sells a lot of pies, but they don’t
make up a large portion of his sales overall. He’s thinking about making Wednesday
evenings “Pizza Pie Night”, offering a special discount for college kids.

3. One of the first items on the menu back in the 1950’s was liver and onions. Miss Martha
hosts a bridge club at Joe’s Diner every week and orders liver and onions every time.
Joe doesn’t make much money off the item relative to the cost of buying the liver and
only Miss Martha and her friends order the item.

4. Joe’s Diner is popular on the weekends with local college kids who come in for brunch.
The majority of his weekend sales are omelets which are cheap and easy for Joe to
make

ANSWERS

1. Popular, but not profitable. This item is a plow horse — Joe sells a lot of these
sandwiches but wants to increase his profit margin by reducing food cost.

2. Not popular, but profitable. Pizzas are a ‘puzzle’ item — when Joe does sell pizza he
makes a profit, but he doesn’t sell many overall (that is, pizza doesn’t make up a large
percentage of total sales).

3. Not popular or profitable. Liver and onions is a dog item — Joe keeps it on the menu for
nostalgia and his customer base.

4. Popular and profitable - Omelet’s are a start. They have a low food cost percentage,
meaning Joe can sell them for more than it costs to make and they are popular on his
busiest days.

Food Service Logistics 7
© 2022 Veritense™

Assessing Profitability
Popularity index is calculated by dividing the sales of an item by total sales.

Profit contribution is calculated by calculating profit (subtracting food cost from selling price) and
then dividing by the total profits.

Given the following profit contributions and popularity indexes, plot each item on the graph. The
X-axis is profitability (profit contribution) and the Y-axis is popularity (popularity index). Then,
classify each item as a dog, puzzle, star, or plow horse.

rime rib

eggie Lasagna

40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%

5%

0%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40%

Food Service Logistics 8
© 2022 Veritense™

ANSWERS

Profit Popularity . | —
Contribution Index e b
Chicken

Chicken
Plow horse e
parmesan
e Prime no
Veggie : 0% ”
Lasagna

Finance and Foodservice

There is overlap between financial concepts at the management level, such as budgets and
cost-benefit analysis, and financial concepts in context of foodservice. The below concepts are
discussed in the Calculations and Formulas Study Guide. Be sure you’re familiar with the
following topics in addition to what is covered in this section.

e Budget types e Cost-Benefit Analysis
e Finance ratios e Value-Added Research
e Balance sheets e Break-even Point

Build on what you know about finance and foodservice as you review the following sections on
controlling food cost, improving scheduling efficiency, and forecasting production.

Menu and Food Cost
Menu Cost

There are several ways to control menu costs in foodservice. These include making seasonal
changes to the menu items and also having the same menus across different avenues. For
example, in a hospital with a commercial cafeteria and patient services, having the same menu
for both will decrease costs by reducing food cost, labor and production cost, and optimizing
inventory and food usage. Making seasonal changes to the menu will optimize the availability of
items, while also reducing costs.

Having the same menu items will reduce food cost partly by decreasing food waste, and it will
reduce labor cost because it is quicker for a cook to prepare several of the same menu item

Food Service Logistics 9
© 2022 Veritense™

rather than several different menu items. Additionally, having the same items on the menu
means that less items need to be kept in inventory.

Food Cost

Standardized recipes will reduce food waste and thus, reduce cost.' Ingredient and portion
control will also help reduce food cost. Having a system in place to control who takes items out
of the storage room, such as a request system, will control who has access to what.

Using proper measuring tools, such as scoop sizes to serve portions, will ensure that a recipe
intended to serve 100 patients actually does serve 100 patients. Using proper measuring tools
while preparing food will also ensure that only the appropriate amount of ingredients is used.

In summary, measures taken to decrease food cost, decrease labor/production cost, and
optimize inventory and food usage will all result in a better control of total costs.

Forecasting production

In any business, you may try to forecast future sales volume to better estimate preparation or
anticipated costs. There are different forecast methods and they make different assumptions.

There are 3 main types of forecasting methods: qualitative techniques, time series and
projection, and causal models.

Qualitative techniques are based on expert opinion and consider special events relevant to
the industry. The idea of special events can be illustrated easily with the technology field — a
fast-paced industry that has to account for exponential growth in technological knowledge.
Qualitative techniques may or may not consider historical data. They include Delphi methods,
market research, panel consensus, visionary forecast, and historical analogy.

Time series and projection methods, including exponential smoothing and moving
averages, look at patterns and changes in patterns using only historical data. If you have a new
product or are running a new menu campaign without historical data, you would not be able to
use these methods. You would want to turn to qualitative information instead since historical
data is scant.

When using a moving average, each point of the average is the average of n consecutive
points prior. The number of data points prior (n) depend on the effect of seasons, stability of the
estimate, and anticipated irregularity. If you use a 3-month moving average, the average for
month 4 would be an average of the previous 3 months, rather than an average of the entire
past year. Exponential smoothing is similar to moving average but gives more weight to recent
data points.

Note that moving average and exponential smoothing models assume that sales follow a certain
pattern over time. We can then project that pattern, accounting for differences we anticipate.
The simplest type of projection would assume constant growth. Other types of time series and
projection methods include Box-Jenkins, X-11, trend projections, and life-cycle analysis.

Food Service Logistics 10
© 2022 Veritense™

Causal methods for forecasting include regression models, econometric models, intention-to-
buy surveys, and input-output models. You may see regression on the exam, such as “linear
regression”. Regression models can include the effect of several variables or factors that will
influence anticipated sales volume. These models are more statistically intensive than moving
averages and do not assume a certain pattern in sales.

See examples of forecasting methods in the Calculations and Formulas Study Guide.
Scheduling and Efficiency
Having an effective production plan and schedule will help control costs in several ways.

e Reduces wasted time and improves process flow to reduce labor cost.

e Decreases the need for safety stocks and work-in-process inventories which will reduce
inventory costs.

e Optimizes equipment usage and increases work capacity. For example, scheduling recipe
production for 2 cooks using the same equipment would not be efficient and would lead to
downtime. Instead, having a morning cook and an afternoon cook stagger these recipes
would be more efficient.

As you reviewed in the Management Concepts Study Guide, planning is a key management
function. In order to craft a production plan that optimizes efficiency, you need certain
information and skills, including:

e Forecast sales volume e Standardized recipes and scheduling

e An inventory control system e Anunderstanding of potential problems

e Operational capacity (equipment & labor)
To actually plan out the processes, you may use tools like PERT charts (reviewed in
Management Concepts study guide), particularly if you have a large project that will require
many steps. You'll want to identify what must happen first and what the shortest path is to
success. Planning means you will have enough materials for all the recipes, that you anticipate
bottlenecks and shift to another part of the process if you can, and you identify any specialized
positions that you need to hire to fill prior to beginning your endeavor.

As you review material for the exam, always think back to how they fit together for running an
effective and profitable foodservice enterprise.

e How does an effective production plan and schedule help control costs?

Food Service Logistics 11
© 2022 Veritense™

Procurement and Production

Section Source (unless otherwise indicated)

e Gregoire MB, Spears MC. Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach. 9th ed. Upper

Saddle River, NJ: Pearson; 2016.

Procurement includes receiving, purchasing, inventory control, and storage. Procurement also
refers to a specific process of developing specifications, contacting sources, evaluating bids,
and choosing a supplier. This procurement process can be informal or formal and, depending
on the funding source, there may be regulations. For example, school lunch programs are
funded by the USDA and must follow certain procurement processes.

Informal Procurement Process

Develop specifications in writing

Identify sources eligible, able, and willing to provide products

Contact sources

Evaluate bidders’ response

Determine most responsive and responsible bidder at the lowest price

oPoNn=

Formal Procurement uses the same process as informal procurement but scores bidders
based on established scoring criteria, such as locally grown items receiving extra points. There
are two methods of formal procurement: competitive sealed bidding and competitive negotiation.

Competitive sealed bidding uses an invitation to bid and competitive negotiation uses a
request for proposal, or RFP.

In the bidding process, you may come across terms like wholesaler, broker, and manufacturer’s
representative.

The wholesale trade industry obtains products below retail value, sells them to retail
establishments, and marks up the price to retail value to make their profit. Wholesalers
purchase and sell goods, and take ownership of those goods.

A broker is an independent sales representative who contracts with certain manufacturers,
processors, and prime source producers to arrange transactions between the two parties.
Brokers don’t keep inventory and thus, have no title to the goods sold but are paid a
commission.

A manufacturer’s representative or agent sells manufacturer products to wholesale and retail
customers. The wholesaler or retailer pays the manufacturer’s representative a commission on
the sale.

e What is the difference between an informal and formal procurement process?
e What are the 5 steps in the procurement process?

Food Service Logistics 12
© 2022 Veritense™

Contract implementation

When a bid is confirmed and turned into a contract, an implementation plan for the contract
should be drafted. To develop this implementation plan, the foodservice manager should
consider several questions that will impact the relationship between the department and the
supplier.

How will purchase data be tracked?

How will performance data be reported and evaluated?

Who will assess and report compliance with established policies?

How will performance affect employees and existing contracts?

How will adjustments to policies and goals be made? Who will have final authority?

aron>

From this brief overview, you can see that contract implementation is more complicated than it
may seem. If the contract is between a food service management company and a hospital,
specific documents that need to be developed may include standardized employee orientation
manuals, employee performance evaluations and key performance indicators (KPIs). KPls for a
foodservice department may be plate cost, food cost, meals per labor hour, and sales per labor
hour. Your dietetic internship may have been with a food service management company that
had contracts with a single hospital or with multiple hospitals where you did your clinical
rotations.

Specification Development

Specifications should be carefully developed to ensure consistency of 1) price, 2) product
quality, 3) operational function, and 4) fit for purpose.

Specifications are provided to potential bidders and if a contract is agreed upon with those
specifications, any extra cost of reformulating specifications will fall to you, not the supplier.
Specifications will include both product requirements and product preferences. Product
preferences should have a built-in tolerance level that suppliers can operate within.

Examples of information that would be included in a specification include the grade and brand
(grade of meat, brand of dairy), count per container (if you are ordering 12 containers a month,
they should have the right number of units), and the price per unit.

Group Purchasing

Group purchasing is when foodservice operations create collective buying power to purchase
more products at a lower price. These are called Group Purchasing Organizations, or GPOs.
The foodservice operations may be schools or community hospital units, for example, that order
similar products in a similar location.

While lower purchasing costs are a benefit to being part of a GPO, there are drawbacks in terms
of losing individuality. Also, some GPOs have fee structures and there are rules and regulations
to follow at multiple levels (federal, state, local, and district).

Food Service Logistics 13
© 2022 Veritense™

Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of group purchasing in foodservice

Advantages
Increased purchasing power
Increased menu variety and quality
Labor savings
Cost savings

Disadvantages
Requires accurate menu forecasting
Requires membership agreement
Requires delivery and storage capacity
Requires minimum case orders

You are the foodservice manager at a small community hospital. There are several other
healthcare businesses in the area that require foodservice, and at local meetings, you’ve
discussed the idea of forming a Group Purchasing Organization. Some members shared their
motivations for joining your GPO and some shared their reservations. Match these comments to
the advantages and disadvantages above.

e The manager from Hospital A has been wanting to increase the variety of their menu but
can’t afford it. The manager is looking forward to being able to purchase those new
products for less with the GPO.

e The assistant manager at the rehabilitation center just quit, and the manager is
scrambling to get all the work done. At GPO meetings, the manager confides in you that
she has run out of inventory the past few months and had to order items to cover the
difference. What process should she focus on?

e The majority of the group agrees to order ground turkey next month, but the minimum
case order is larger than other order quantities. You draft up a cyclic menu that uses the
ground turkey in several different ways but are concerned about being able to store the
ground turkey frozen in your small freezer unit.

siapso eased WNnwiuIW pue ‘jusWse1be
diysuequiaw ‘Ayoedeo abes0}s pue Aianljap SauinbaiOdg5 =e
Bunsesai0} nuaw aroidwi 0} spaeu saHeueyy se
Ayipenb pue AjaueA nuowW peseasou] =e

Prime Vendor Agreement

A prime vendor agreement is a pricing contract that a supplier offers to businesses on products
they frequently buy. It is also used when a single vendor provides a customer with a majority of
purchases. Prime vendor agreements fit well with wholesale distribution and should benefit both
buyer and seller.

Pricing can be calculated with one of these several methods.

e Cost-plus pricing: product cost + flat markup fee

e Cost-percentage pricing: product cost + percentage rate
e Cost pricing: product cost

e Market pricing: market price

Food Service Logistics 14
© 2022 Veritense™

Cost-percentage pricing is typically used when the product is subject to spoilage, and market
pricing is used when the price of a product goes up and down during the year.

Just like with contract implementation, price audits should occur to make sure best practices of
the prime vendor agreement are being met.

Purchasing Process

As foodservice manager, you want to prep for next month’s menu. To start the purchasing
process, you use a requisition form to request items from the purchasing manager. The
purchasing manager will writeup the purchase order and give it to the supplier. After receiving
the products, the supplier invoices the purchasing manager.

Requisition form: internal form used by the foodservice manager or chef to request items from
the purchasing manager or purchasing department

Purchase order: lists items to be purchased from supplier and is completed by buyer

Invoice: provided by supplier to buyer in order to request payment for items received

Chef goes to the purchasing manager with a indicating the items

needed for next week’s catering event. The purchasing manager drafts a and

sends it to the supplier to place the order. When the items arrive, the receiving clerk gets the
from the driver and checks it against the order, then delivers it to the purchasing

manager.

Receiving Process
The receiving process is:

1) Compare purchase order to invoice

2) Inspect items against invoice

3) Accept or reject items — fresh produce and frozen foods should be examined before
accepting the item

4) Complete receiving records and sign the invoice

5) Place products in appropriate storage

e Write out the 5 steps in the receiving process, noting the order in which steps are
completed.

Food Service Logistics 15
© 2022 Veritense™

The invoice is a delivery slip that accompanies the order listing the items ordered, the unit price,
and the total cost. During receiving, you check the items received and the purchase order
against the invoice.

Blind check receiving method is when you give the receiving clerk an invoice or purchase
order that lists the items but does not include the quantity, weight, or price. That information
needs to be filled in and is used to check the delivery against the invoice. This takes longer and
thus, costs more.

FOB origin means “free on board”. Liability and title possession of the items ordered shift to the
customer when the shipment leaves the point of origin. CIF origin (cost insurance and freight) is
the opposite as responsibility transfers to the buyer only when the goods arrive at the
destination.

Inventory

Inventory control is key to effective kitchen management. Money is spent on goods that are then
transformed and sold. When goods spoil, are pilfered, or are insufficient to produce goods to be
sold, the financial health of the foodservice company or department suffers.

In order to calculate food cost and cost percentages, you need to have a system to track and
record inventory. The complexity of the record keeping system depends on the size of the
operation and/or the number of people managing inventory. Having a system in place also helps
with receiving — the order specifications expected (purchased) should match the purchase order
in the inventory system.

Security measures for large operations is particularly important to avoid pilfering and to
identify when standardized recipes are not being used. Depending on the size of the
operation, the record system for outgoing inventory may differ. Larger operations may have
separate storage areas, coolers, and even a purchasing manager from which the foodservice
manager or chef in charge would “order” food through from the storeroom. For smaller
operations, taking a count of inventory at the end of the day may be sufficient. Having someone
in charge of moving inventory from storage areas to prep areas and someone in charge of
requisition forms means there will be a record of outgoing inventory. It can be helpful to have
someone accountable for this, rather than relying on all personnel to use proper procedures at
all times, because staff may feel it’s easier to enter the storage room and take what they need
for their item.

One type of inventory classification system that takes into account the value of different
inventory items is the ABC inventory classification system. Relative importance of each item
is quantified using the activity level which looks at what percent of total inventory an item
contributes, along with how much it contributes to the annual total of purchases. “A” items are
those that make up 10-20% of the total number of items kept in inventory but make up 60-80%
of the total value of purchases. “C” items are those that are 50-60% of inventory kept on hand
but with only 5-10% of the total purchases. “B” items fall between the “A” and “C’” item ranges.

Food Service Logistics 16
© 2022 Veritense™

You want to classify 3 types of items in your inventory. Total costs in purchasing spent over the
past year was $420,000 and you keep 5,000 units of inventory on hand. You have 500 units of
Item #1 and purchasing costs for the past year were $315,000. Item #2 has 3,000 units in
storage and purchasing costs were $21,000. Item #3 has 1,500 units with purchasing costs of
$84,000. Classify each item as “A”, “B”, or “C”. Cover up the bottom of the page if you want to

work through it on your own.

Item #1
Item #2
Item #3
Item #1: A item
Percent of Purchases
$315,000 = 75%
$420,000 °°”°
Item #2: C item
Percent of Purchases
$21,000
—_ = 5%
$420,000
Item #3: B item
Percent of Purchases
$84,000 = 20%
$420,000 ~~
Inventory Types

Percent of Units

500

— ~ 190
5,000 10%

Percent of Units

3,000 _ «0%
5,000.

Percent of Units

1,500 | 300%
5,000.

There are only 2 types of inventory. Perpetual inventory is a running balance of inventory on
hand. Records for each product are maintained, with the date that items were received, the date
items were removed, the reorder point, the purchase unit size, and par stock all in one place.
Perpetual inventory can be time consuming and thus, expensive. It may only be used for costly
items in small operations. Accuracy of perpetual inventory may be verified by physical inventory

methods.

Physical inventory is completed a minimum of once a month with physical counts recorded on
a spreadsheet. The product name, unit size, count, unit price, and total value are recorded. The
unit price and total value are added after counting and “extended” to closing inventory. The
next time physical inventory is taken, the opening inventory is compared to the closing

inventory to determine monthly food cost.

Food Service Logistics 17
© 2022 Veritense™

Inventory Management

FIFO -— first in, first out. This inventory management method ensures that stock is being rotated
so that the first item stocked (the oldest item) will be used before more recent items.” This
means that new items will be stocked behind older items, so that older items are the most
visible and easiest to grab.

LIFO — last in, first out. This inventory management method has the newest stock used first.”
This method might be used for items that would spoil. New items are stocked in front of older
items, and may replace older items if they have spoiled.

Write FIFO or LIFO next to the statement that matches the definition.

a. Newer items are used before older items
b. Older items are used before newer items

Inventory turnover is how many times in a month inventory is transformed into revenue. It also
tells you how many weeks supply you typically have at a time. Inventory turnover every 1-2
weeks (2-3 times a month) is normal.

First, calculate average food inventory (of beginning and ending inventory). Then, calculate food
cost as the beginning inventory plus purchases that month minus the ending inventory. Finally,
calculate inventory turnover by dividing food cost by average food inventory.

Food cost
Inventory Turnover = —
Average food inventory

e Write out the inventory turnover formula plugging in the formulas for food cost and average
food inventory given in the previous paragraph.

Low turnover rate (>2 weeks) means there is a large portion of money in inventory which
increases storage space requirements, energy requirements, capital costs, and spoilage. High
turnover rate (<1 week) might indicate pilfering or that standardized recipes are not being used.

The last part of inventory management is knowing when to reorder to maintain par stock, or
safety stock. If you always want to have at least 5 cans of canned peaches in stock (par stock:
5 cans), then the reorder point of canned peaches needs to account for lead time and safety
stock. You can use economic order quantity to help calculate safety stock. The economic order
quantity (EOQ) is the optimum quantity of an item to be purchased each time to minimize the
cost of ordering and carrying an item in inventory.

For example, if your supplier has number 10 cans of tomato sauce in cases of 6 and cases of
20, you need to decide which case size works best for you. To do that, you need to consider
holding cost (aka inventory cost-- the cost of carrying the average quantity in inventory), fixed
ordering cost (the cost of placing orders on items with a fixed cost),

purchase price per unit, and annual demand (sales per year). Total cost Odls :9 ‘O51:

Food Service Logistics 18
© 2022 Veritense™

is the sum of ordering cost, holding cost, and purchase cost, where purchase cost is the
variable cost of goods that fluctuates throughout the year, multiplied by the annual demand
quantity.

F = fixed ordering cost

S = sales per year (annual demand)
C = inventory cost as percent of total cost
P = purchase price per unit

TOTALCOST |

\ Varn
° are eo
ss 7” INVENTORY

_—— P

CARRYING COST

*

Cost

SETUP + FIXED
ORDER COST

Order quantity

Once you have your safety stock number, you can figure out your re-order point timing, which is
used in fixed order quantity inventory systems and means you will reorder X days before
reaching your safety stock number rather than waiting until you reach your safety stock number.
Re-order point timing accounts for lead/delivery time.

Over time, your inventory quantity fluctuates Using the lead time for your item (how long it

Stock | | eplenish takes to be delivered), back calculate from the
hems get used and then f ‘shea Stock time you will hit your safely stock to when you
need to reorder, accounting for lead time

Time Time

Re — order point = Safety Stock + Average Sales x Lead Time

Food Service Logistics 19
© 2022 Veritense™

Par stock ordering brings stock numbers up to par level each time an order is placed,
regardless of how much is on hand. This system means that stock is allowed to dip below par
level.

Minimum-maximum stock method means that we deplete stock to the safety level (par stock
level) before an order is placed. When the quantity reaches par level, we re-order so that we’re
brough up to the maximum level (which is decided ahead of time). The number of units ordered
each time will be the same — this would be the difference between the maximum level and par
stock level. Orders for some items with this method may be standing orders that eliminate the
cost associated with ordering daily or weekly orders (like paying an employee to do so).

Just-in-time purchasing is when you purchase items as needed for immediate production and
consumption without storing or recording in inventory. This means that the receiving clerk will
deliver items from the loading dock to the kitchen station where they will be used, without
logging them into inventory.

When you cost out inventory, you have to decide on your purchase price method to determine
the cost of products since the cost of items changes over time.

Date Number Unit Cost Value
Opening inventory on 1* of month 10 cans $2.15 $21.50

Received on 8" of month 16 cans $2.25 $36.00
Received on 15" of month 12 cans $2.15 $25.80

Received on 23” of month 8 cans $2.60 $20.80

You take physical inventory and there are 25 cans of peaches. The most recent purchase order
had the cans priced at $2.60. If you assume the unit cost of the 25 cans was $2.60, the price
paid for the last-in items, then the value of your inventory is $65 (LIFO). However, if you look at
the inventory, you can see that the 25 cans left are those from the 23%, the 15", and 5 from the
8" of the month. Using each orders unit cost, the value would be $57.85. If you use the price
paid for the first-in items (FIFO, $2.25 on the 8") for all 25 cans, the inventory would be valued
at $56.25.

A pricing method should be decided upon for managing inventory and used consistently so that
the data can be used for forecasting.

You can also use weighted average purchase pricing. It is more time consuming and uses
the average price paid for the product over time.

(Units in Opening Inventory x Purchase Price) + (Units Purchased During Month x Purchase Price)
Total # Units

Food Service Logistics 20
© 2022 Veritense™

Foodservice Production Systems

A foodservice operation is made up of the foodservice system and a distribution model. A single
foodservice operation may contain more than one type of foodservice system. Once a
foodservice manager decides on the type of production system for a new kitchen, it’s important
to visit similar facilities before meeting with equipment manufacturers. Seeing different layout
options in-use allows the manager to see the equipment, the workflow, and how service works.

Different foodservice systems vary in terms of:

e where food is prepared e how long foods are held
e what type of food is purchased e labor and equipment required
e how foods are held e if food is transported

The 4 different types of foodservice systems include conventional, ready prepared, commissary,
and assembly/serve. Use the tables in the Foodservice Logistics freebie packet at
www.studysmartermethod.com to organize your notes or find the worksheets in your RD exam
Toolkit if purchased via PTEP.

Conventional

Also known as “cook-to-serve”, conventional foodservice systems have kitchens that produce
items for immediate service. Food is purchased, transformed into the final product to serve, and
then held at serving temperature until actually served.

An example includes restaurants and cafeterias. Food is prepared in the same place it is served
and mostly raw food is purchased, though some convenience items may be purchased. Foods
are held at serving temperature until served. Labor requirements are heavy and equipment for
holding food, like chafers and other equipment we'll discuss, are necessary. Food isn’t
transported in this food system.

Advantages of conventional foodservice systems include high food quality and flexibility in the
foods that can be produced. Any food that can be held for up to 2 hours can be produced in this
type of foodservice system, and food quality is maintained if held within this time limit.

However, disadvantages of the conventional foodservice system include less time flexibility and
more labor because food is produced so close to service. Workload is unevenly distributed and
limited to the length of time that hot food can be held.

Ready Prepared

Also known as “cook/chill” and “cook/freeze”, ready prepared foodservice systems have
kitchens that produce and chill menu items and then heat items back up for service. This system
type is often used in combination with other systems.

Food Service Logistics 21
© 2022 Veritense™

Food is prepared on location and then chilled or frozen to be used later on (in the same location
or transported). Large refrigerators and freezers are required for this method, as well as
reheating equipment to warm chilled or frozen food for service time.

Advantages of this method include the ability to prepare food in bulk or in individual portions
which evens out the workload. The menu also supports an increased variety of chilled and
frozen items. If food is transported, this method has the advantage of transporting foods chilled
or frozen, which is easier to do than transporting hot food. Think about this aspect of ready
prepared foodservice when we talk about commissary.

Disadvantages of this method include large equipment requirements — large refrigerators,
freezers and the budget for the high energy costs associated with that equipment. If the power
goes out, a large amount of food can be lost and food safety can be an issue. Also, not all foods
freeze or chill well, so while there is the possibility of variety because of the ready prepared
method, some foods aren’t compatible because they cannot be frozen or chilled well. Freezer
burn, textural changes, and emulsion separation are all food quality concerns with the ready
prepared method, and hot food undergoes 2 heating periods — when it’s first cooked (before
chilling or freezing) and when it’s reheated for preparation.

Commissary

In a commissary foodservice system, the food is prepared in a large, central kitchen and then
delivered in bulk for final production and service. The commissary system is ideal for serving
large volumes of food. Food may be transported frozen, chilled, or hot. Examples include school
systems and airline foods. Raw food is purchased, prepared, and then held frozen, chilled, or
hot during transport until service.

Advantages include cost savings (low food cost, lack of equipment duplication, low labor cost),
limited workload variability, uniform products across service locations, and no cooking during
mealtime. Disadvantages include food safety concerns and quality concerns during holding and
transporting. This method requires reliable transportation and a large production kitchen where
the cost of that large kitchen is only offset by the large quantity of food it’s able to produce.

Since food is transported to the satellite locations, meals can be prepared any time of day in
contrast to conventional foodservice systems where employees have higher workload prior to
mealtimes. Cost savings from avoiding equipment duplication refers to the fact that all of the
food production is done at one location, rather than at several satellite kitchens.

Assembly/Serve

Assembly/serve foodservice systems are also called “convenience food” or “minimal cooking
concept”. Prepared food that requires minimal assembly or cooking prior to service is
purchased. Examples include convenience stores, kiosks, fast food, and special diet menus in
hospitals. Food is held chilled or frozen before being assembled or heated for serving. The only
labor and equipment required is enough to assemble the food and transport it.

Food Service Logistics 22
© 2022 Veritense™

Advantages of the assembly/serve foodservice system is the reduced labor and skill required,
compared to other foodservices systems, as food is purchased already prepared. It also
requires minimal equipment. Pre-portioned items are helpful for a la carte menus and better
portion control means less waste. An important note is that the advantages of this method are
only conferred to a small foodservice operation. Why? The higher food cost from purchasing
prepared food items versus equipment investment isn’t offset with a large foodservice operation
— larger foodservice operations will save money by lowering food cost. Disadvantages of this
system include a limited menu because the variety of the menu is subject to market availability
of prepared foods. Food is also purchased at a higher cost compared to raw food, and the
quality of the pre-prepared foods is not the same as fresh. While minimal equipment for cooking
and other preparation is required (an advantage), refrigerator and freezer space are required.

Food Distribution and Service Systems

Section Source (unless otherwise indicated)
e Gregoire MB, Spears MC. Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach. 9th ed. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson; 2016.

To distinguish centralized and decentralized delivery-service systems, focus on the format of the
food when it’s transported. These delivery service systems may also be called “centralized meal
assembly” and “decentralized meal assembly”.

Centralized Delivery-Service System

In a centralized system, prepared food is portioned and assembled for meals at a central
location. The completed orders are then transported to the customers. You'll see this system in
fast food, restaurants, banquet services, hospitals, and long-term care facilities. Like with
conventional foodservice systems, workload can be uneven and excessively long. Important
things for a manager to consider with centralized systems is the need for close supervision, food
quality control, and portion size control.

It's easier to understand a centralized system in contrast to a decentralized system. A key
difference is how the food is transported — plated or in bulk?

Decentralized Delivery-Service System

In a decentralized service system, there is a main kitchen and satellite locations. The satellite
locations might be a serving or assembly galley, a ward kitchen, or satellite kitchens. Bulk
quantities of food are prepared and transported to the satellite locations — they may be
transported hot or cold. Staff at the satellite locations reheat, portion, and assemble the meals
as necessary. After meal service, dishes are returned to the central kitchen.

Decentralized systems are used when there is a large distance between kitchen and consumer,
and/or the menu items travel better in bulk than plated. This type of system might be used in
large hospitals, medical centers, school districts, and hotels.

Food Service Logistics 23
© 2022 Veritense™

Choosing Between Centralized and De-Centralized

Knowing what type of business might use centralized versus decentralized isn’t the key point.
Rather, these locations provide an example of why a certain system might be preferred over
another. Restaurants, smaller hospitals, and long-term care facilities don’t have a large distance
between kitchen and consumer. Larger hospitals or medical centers may have a larger distance
and may also have the extra space for serving galleys. Many patient wards have a pantry where
tray service can be set up before distributing. However, other hospitals prep trays in the
production kitchen, load them in holding carts, and deliver them immediately to patients
(centralized). Similarly, a large school may have a large enough kitchen to prep and serve food,
but smaller schools may not have a kitchen onsite.

As a foodservice manager, choosing the type of distribution (delivery) system your foodservice
operation will use depends on service-based factors and customer-based factors.

Use the worksheet table you have (or get it at www.studysmartermethod.com) to summarize
what you’ve learned so far about service-based factors and customer-based factors. Think
about how the type of foodservices system and foodservice organization impacts the choice of
the distribution system. Come up with your own examples of the service-based factors. Add
your own research.

Service-based factors include:

* Type of foodservice system * Food safety concerns
* Type of foodservice organization * Meal service timing

* Facility size and layout * Energy usage

* Personnel skill * Service style

* Economic factors

Facility size and layout considerations include asking, “Is the facility spread out? Are there
elevators or conveyor belts that could help transport food? What equipment is available in each
area? What can a central kitchen accomplish compared to a satellite kitchen? If food is being
transported, is there a loading dock to load the food onto trucks?”

Personnel skill considerations include any specialty items or preparations that need to be
done. For example, is there a specialty cafeteria counter for sushi or hibachi grilling that would
require a specific skill set?

Economic factors include the amount of labor and equipment required, the cost of inputs and
outputs, the cost of transporting food, and considerations to avoid equipment duplication. What
foodservice system is designed to avoid equipment duplication?

Food safety concerns include time and temperature relationships — do you need new
equipment to meet food safety standards? Can food be delivered in time?

Meal service timing concerns are closely tied with customer-based factors. Are customers
served at once or can service periods be staggered? For example, can different hospital floors
be served at different times, or can a school have staggered lunch periods?

Food Service Logistics 24
© 2022 Veritense™

Energy usage is tied with economic factors, namely equipment requirements. If dishes from
satellite locations are going to be washed back at a main kitchen, a large capacity warewasher,
such as a conveyor washer, might be required. This type of equipment has high energy usage
and requires specialty wiring.

I'll go into service style in-depth in the next section.

Customer-based factors include the overall number of customers served, how quickly
customers are served, if groups are served at once, and in what environment are customers
served.

Service Style
Self-service: customer carries food from display place to dining area

Cafeteria style
e Traditional: customers follow each other in a line and are served by employees standing
behind the counter
e Hollow square/free-flow/scramble: separate counter areas provide different menu types;
this format increase speed and flexibility compared to the traditional cafeteria style

Machine vending: an outside company is contracted to keep items stocked. Items may include
drinks, snacks, sandwiches, microwave items, or frozen foods. Machine vending is often used in
supplement to other types of foodservice, like handling off-hours.

Buffet — provides many options and items but must optimize eye appeal and choose items that
hold up under long presentation time

Drive-thru — pretty self-explanatory!

Tray service — trays are delivered to floor pantry or to the patient. Tray service requires
cooperation between different subsystems, such as foodservice and nursing in a hospital. Food
quality and food safety issues also need to be addressed with holding times pre- and post-
delivery

Wait service
e American — plates are individually prepared for customers and delivered by server with
all guests at one table served before moving on to the next table
e French — portions are brought to customers on a platter delivered to customers while the
chief server “completes a table” by carving, deboning, or creating a sauce table-side
e Russian — food is prepared and portioned in the kitchen on a serving platter and then
plated for the customer at the table

What type of service did your high school use? What about the hospital where you did
rotations? Have you worked anywhere else, like a long-term care facility or rehabilitation center,
that served food?

Food Service Logistics 25
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Group 1)

Answer these practice questions using the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™ that you read about in
Chapter 2 and 3 of the Study Smarter Method for the RD-Exam section. Instead of answering these
questions using your memory and logic, use the study guide text and/or your own research to determine
which answer is correct (and why), and why the other answers are incorrect. Pay attention to the question
itself, and be sure you know what the question is asking. There are answers with explanations following.
If this is your first set of practice questions, go back and skim Chapters 2 and 3 in the Study Smarter
Method for the RD-Exam section to remind yourself of the types of questions and how to answer them.

1. The head of the foodservice department informs you that a new specialty diet will be added to the

patient menu by the end of the year. They want you to draft up the advantages and disadvantages of
a ready prepared versus assembly serve system. Which of following aspects differ between the two
foodservice systems?

a. Menu variety is limited to what can be chilled or frozen

b. Less food waste with assembly serve system

c. Less labor required for ready prepared system

d. Lower food cost with assembly serve system

2. What advantages does a ready prepared foodservice system have over a conventional foodservice
system?
a. More even workload
b. More labor required
c. Lower energy costs
d. One heating period

3. Which type of foodservice system may be particularly prone to food safety concerns?
a. Commissary
b. Assembly-serve
c. Conventional
d. Ready prepared

4. Which of the following examples follows good menu planning principles?
a. Steak, sauteed broccoli, rice pilaf
b. Grilled tilapia, roasted cauliflower, vanilla ice cream
c. Meatballs, whole baby potatoes, roasted Brussel sprouts
d. AandC

5. As the new director of foodservice operations for a hospital, you decide to standardize purchasing
procedures and begin buying ingredients in bulk when possible. Which type of menu would pair well
with the changes you want to make?

a. Static menu

b. Prix fixe menu
c. Cycle menu

d. Seasonal menu

Food Service Logistics 26
6.

7.

10.

11.

© 2022 Veritense™

One of your menu items is profitable when sold, but overall, not very popular with customers. What
steps could you take to improve its popularity?

a. Increase the selling price

b. Position in a prime spot on the menu

c. Move to the back page

d. None of the above

What are the steps, in order, for a formal procurement process?

a. Develop written specifications, identify potential sources, contact sources, evaluate
bidders’ responses, determine the best bidder based on response and price

b. Develop written specifications, contact potential sources, identify best sources, evaluate
bidders’ responses, determine the best bidder based on response and price

c. Develop written specifications, determine the best bidder based on response and price,
score bidders’ responses, contact sources

d. Develop written specifications, issue a request-for-proposal, score bidders’ responses,
determine the best bidder based on response and price

Over the past year, your department spent $560,000 in purchasing and kept, on average, 9000 units
of inventory on hand. Item 1 costs were $330,000 for 900 units. Item 2 costs were $40,000 for 5000
units. Item 3 costs were $29,000 for 4700 units. Item 4 costs were $400,000 for 8000 units. Which
item would be classified as an “A” item?

a. Item 1
b. Item 2
c. lItem3
d. Item 4
Being part of a group purchasing organization can purchasing power and

menu variety.
a. Increase, decrease
b. Increase, increase
c. Decrease, decrease
d. Decrease, increase

Which of the following examples represents the correct stocking order for a LIFO inventory
management system, with expiration dates listed from left-to-right representing front-to-back of the
shelf?

June-1-2020; June-13-2020; June-20-2020; July-7-2020

July-7-2020; July-31-2020; June-30-2020; June-1-2020

July-21-2020; July-15-2020; July-1-2020; June-20-2020

June-1-2020; July-1-2020; August-1-2020; May-1-2020

aoop

As the person in charge of food purchasing for your department, you are meeting with a potential
vendor for the first time to determine what type of meat they could provide. When you meet with
them, you should have a(n) prepared.

a. Prime vendor agreement

b. Requisition form

c. Item specification

d. Purchase order

Food Service Logistics 27
© 2022 Veritense™

12. What is the definition of an “A” item using ABC inventory classification?

a.

b.
c.
d.

An item that makes up 50-60% of total items in inventory and 5-10% of purchases
An item that makes up 5-10% of total items in inventory and 60-80% of purchases
An item that makes up 30-50% of total items in inventory and 20-40% of purchases
An item that makes up 10-20% of total items in inventory and 60-80% of purchases

13. Which inventory management method ensures older items are most visible?

a.
b.
c.
d.

FIFO

LIFO
Perpetual
Safety stock

14. Calculate the economic order quantity for purchasing #10 cans of tomato sauce using the following
information: fixed order cost of $8.00, annual demand of 12 cases per year, 3% of inventory costs,
and $58.50 per case of 20.

a.

b.
c.
d

11
18
80
90

Food Service Logistics 28
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Group 1) Answers

1. The head of the foodservice department informs you that a new specialty diet will be added to the

patient menu by the end of the year. They want you to draft up the advantages and disadvantages of
a ready prepared versus assembly serve system. Which of following aspects differ between the two
foodservice systems?

a. Menu variety is limited to what can be chilled or frozen

b. Less food waste with assembly serve system

c. Less labor required for ready prepared system

d. Lower food cost with assembly serve system

Answer: B, less food waste with assembly serve system. Both assembly serve and ready prepared
are limited to what can be chilled or frozen, however because items are purchased pre-portioned in an
assembly serve system, there is less food waste. Ready prepared systems require more labor than
assembly serve systems (though conventional systems require the most labor), but food cost is higher
with assembly serve because prepared foods are more expensive than raw foods.

2. What advantages does a ready prepared foodservice system have over a conventional foodservice
system?
a. More even workload
b. More labor required
c. Lower energy costs
d. One heating period

Answer: A, more even workload. Conventional foodservice systems have uneven workloads in the
schedule because the majority of food preparation is done just prior to service so that food is held only for
the maximum of 2 hours. For this same reason, conventional systems require more labor than ready
prepared. Ready prepared foodservice systems prepare food in advance and then chill or freeze items,
and reheat prior to service. Thus, food production can occur at any time and is not tethered to meal time.
However, conventional systems may have lower energy costs compared to ready prepared because of
the high energy requirement of large refrigerators and freezers required to hold chilled and frozen food.
Additionally, in a ready prepared foodservice system, the food undergoes two heating periods, which may
reduce food quality.

3. Which type of foodservice system may be particularly prone to food safety concerns?
a. Commissary
b. Assembly-serve
c. Conventional
d. Ready prepared

Answer: A, commissary. Because all items are prepared at a single central kitchen, transported and
then held onsite, food safety is of particular concern with this type of foodservice system. Write your own
questions, modeled after these 3, so that the answer would be the other types of foodservice systems
and concepts covered in this section.

Food Service Logistics 29
© 2022 Veritense™

4. Which of the following examples follows good menu planning principles?
a. Steak, sauteed broccoli, rice pilaf
b. Grilled tilapia, roasted cauliflower, vanilla ice cream
c. Meatballs, whole baby potatoes, roasted Brussel sprouts
d. AandC

Answer: A. Meu planning principles center around a variety of color, flavors, texture, and food shapes —
thinking about how the food looks upon the plate, as well as the different textures and flavors. Answer
choice B foods are all white. Answer choice C foods are all round.

5. As the new director of foodservice operations for a hospital, you decide to standardize purchasing
procedures and begin buying ingredients in bulk when possible. Which type of menu would pair well
with the changes you want to make?

a. Static menu

b. Prix fixe menu
c. Cycle menu

d. Seasonal menu

Answer: C. A cycle menu has a different menu for each day of the cycle (such as the week or month),
that provides variety for the customer while providing control over purchasing, production, and cost for the
operation side. Cycle menus save time and control food costs while still offering variety that can
incorporate seasonality, holidays, and USDA commodity foods (which are used commonly for school
menus). Define static menu, du jour menu, prix fixe menu, table d’héte menu, a la carte menu, and single-
use menu.

6. One of your menu items is profitable when sold, but overall, not very popular with customers. What
steps could you take to improve its popularity?
a. Increase the selling price
b. Position in a prime spot on the menu
c. Move to the back page
d. None of the above

Answer: B. Items that are profitable but not popular are puzzle items. Strategies to improve popularity
include reducing the selling price or offering a smaller portion size, or featuring it as a special, or give ita
prime visibility spot on the menu. Dog items are not popular or profitable, stars are popular and profitable,
and plowhorses are popular but not profitable.

Food Service Logistics 30
© 2022 Veritense™

7. What are the steps, in order, for a formal procurement process?

a. Develop written specifications, identify potential sources, contact sources, evaluate
bidders’ responses, determine the best bidder based on response and price

b. Develop written specifications, contact potential sources, identify best sources, evaluate
bidders’ responses, determine the best bidder based on response and price

c. Develop written specifications, determine the best bidder based on response and price,
score bidders’ responses, contact sources

d. Develop written specifications, issue a request-for-proposal, score bidders’ responses,
determine the best bidder based on response and price

Answer: D. The 5 steps of the informal procurement process are develop written specifications, identify
potential sources, contact sources, evaluate bidders’ responses, determine the best bidder based on
response and price. The main difference between informal and formal procurement is that formal
procurement processes involve scoring bidders using an established scoring criterion. Additionally, formal
procurement processes may alter the way they contact potential sources, with competitive sealed bidding
issuing potential sources an invitation to bid while competitive negotiation issuing a broad request-for-
proposals. Answer A is the correct answer for the informal procurement process. Answer B has mixed the
24 and 3" steps of informal procurement. Answer choice C has mixed up several of the steps for formal
procurement.

8. Over the past year, your department spent $560,000 in purchasing and kept, on average, 9000 units
of inventory on hand. Item 1 costs were $330,000 for 900 units. Item 2 costs were $40,000 for 5000
units. Item 3 costs were $29,000 for 4700 units. Item 4 costs were $400,000 for 8000 units. Which
item would be classified as an “A” item?

a. Item 1
b. Item 2
c. lItem3
d. Item 4

Answer: A. An “A” item makes up 10-20% of inventory and about 60-80% of costs. Item 1 made up 10%
of inventory and 59% of cost. A “C” item makes up about half of inventory (50-60%) but only 5-10% of
costs. A “B” item falls somewhere in between. Item 2 made up 56% of inventory and 7% of costs. Item 3
made up 52% of inventory and 5% of costs. Items 2 and 3 are what types of items? Item 4 made up 89%
of inventory and 71% of costs. To calculate percent of inventory, divide the item units by 9000 units of
inventory. To calculate percent of costs, divide the item cost by $560,000. Tip: for questions like this,
rearrange the information in the question into a chart, such as a table with item name, number of units,
and purchasing costs.

9. Being part of a group purchasing organization can purchasing power and
menu variety.
a. Increase, decrease
b. Increase, increase
c. Decrease, decrease
d. Decrease, increase

Answer: B. Advantages of being part of a group purchasing organization are an increase in purchasing
power and an increase in menu variety and quality. Group purchasing is when foodservice operations
create collective buying power to purchase more products at a lower price, including being able to afford
an increase in menu variety because the cost is shared across the group members. Drawbacks include
the need for larger delivery and storage capacity due to minimum case orders as well as fee structures

Food Service Logistics 31
© 2022 Veritense™

and agreed upon membership terms. Finally, your department should have a system in place for accurate
menu forecasting.

10. Which of the following examples represents the correct stocking order for a LIFO inventory
management system, with expiration dates listed from left-to-right representing front-to-back of the
shelf.

June-1-2020; June-13-2020; June-20-2020; July-7-2020

July-7-2020; July-31-2020; June-30-2020; June-1-2020

July-21-2020; July-15-2020; July-1-2020; June-20-2020

June-1-2020; July-1-2020; August-1-2020; May-1-2020

2908p

Answer: C. LIFO stands for least in, first out, and new items are stocked in front of older items, so the
expiration dates would proceed from front-to-back (left-to-rate) latest to earliest. Answer choice A is an
example of FIFO. The other answer choices are mis-ordered dates. Which system would be used for
canned goods versus refrigerated milk?

11. As the person in charge of food purchasing for your department, you are meeting with a potential
vendor for the first time to determine what type of meat they could provide. When you meet with
them, you should have a(n) prepared.

a. Prime vendor agreement
b. Requisition form

c. Item specification

d. Purchase order

Answer: C. An item specification is provided to potential bidders or vendors to specify what you need,
such as the grade of meat, brand of dairy, counts per containers and cases per order, and price per unit.
Specifications are developed to communicate needs with vendors and ensure consistency of price,
product quality, operational function, and fit for purpose. Prime vendor agreements are pricing contracts
that a vendor offers you on products you frequently buy, particularly wholesale distributors. Requisition
forms are filled out by anyone needing to request items from the purchasing manager. After receiving he
requisition form, the purchasing manager will writeup the purchase order and provide it to the supplier. In
this scenario, you would not bring the purchase order because no one has requisitioned items and you
are meeting with the vendor for the first time.

12. What is the definition of an “A” item using ABC inventory classification?
a. Anitem that makes up 50-60% of total items in inventory and 5-10% of purchases
b. An item that makes up 5-10% of total items in inventory and 60-80% of purchases
c. An item that makes up 30-50% of total items in inventory and 20-40% of purchases
d. An item that makes up 10-20% of total items in inventory and 60-80% of purchases

Answer: D. An “A” item is one that that makes up only 10-20% of total items in inventory but makes up
60-80% of total inventory purchases. A “C’” item is one that makes up 50-60% of items in inventory but
only 5-10% of purchase costs (answer choice A). A “B” item is one that falls in between, making up 20-
50% of items in inventory and 10-60% of costs (answer C is an example). Draw a chart or diagram
illustrating A, B, and C items.

Food Service Logistics 32
© 2022 Veritense™

13. Which inventory management method ensures older items are most visible?

a. FIFO
b. LIFO
c. Perpetual

d. Safety stock

Answer: A. FIFO: first in, first out. Stock is rotated so that the oldest item (the first item stocked), is at the
front and will be used before more recently stocked items. New items are stocked behind older items.
LIFO is last in, first out, and is used for items that might spoil. New items are stocked in front of older
items and will replace older items that have spoiled. Perpetual is a type of inventory, and is a running
balance of inventory on hand, and may be verified by physical inventory methods. Safety stock, or par
stock, is the number of units you want to always have on hand.

14. Calculate the economic order quantity for purchasing #10 cans of tomato sauce using the following
information: fixed order cost of $8.00, annual demand of 12 cases per year, 3% of inventory costs,
and $58.50 per case of 20.

a. 11
b. 18
c. 80
d. 90

Answer: C.

F = fixed ordering cost = $8
S = sales per year (annual demand) = 12 cases per year x $58.50 per case = $702
C = inventory cost as percent of total cost = 0.03

P = purchase price per unit = $58.50

lars 2($8* $702) {11232
FOQ= |cp = 0.03($58.50) _ L755 ~ VO400 = 80

Food Service Logistics 33
© 2022 Veritense™

Equipment

As you go through this equipment section, think about what equipment would be needed for the
different foodservice systems, food system organizations, and distribution systems.

The National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) is accredited by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI). NSF has developed standards for public health, safety, environment, and
sustainability assessment. The NSF/ANSI standards are developed with input from industry
representatives, public health and regulatory officials, and user representatives. Their standards
include national standards for foodservice equipment. They offer the “NSF Mark” that assures
rigorous testing of the equipment their mark is on.

When buying equipment, NSF rating, warranties, depreciation, steel gauge, and wall/floor
clearance are important to consider for nearly all types of equipment. Other specifications are
unique to each type of equipment — such as hot versus low water temperature in dishwashers,
BTUs in gas ranges, and voltage in electric ranges.

Warewashers

“Warewashers’ is the general term for dishwashing equipment in commercial foodservice
operations. Wares include dishes, glasses, and silverware. Types of warewashers differ in water
temperature and style.

Temperature Styles

High temperature warewashers use super-heated water to clean dishes, reaching a rinsing
temperature of 180 degrees F and don’t require a chemical sanitizing solution. While a flash dry
feature reduces the energy needed to dry with these models, the hot water requirement uses
more energy compared to low temperature models.

Low temperature warewashers use sanitizing chemicals and cleaning agents to clean and
sanitize dishes. Compared to high temperature models, these models create less steam and
heat. You can imagine that less steam and less ambient heat might make the dish room more
pleasant for employees or may be preferred for an under-bar glass washer.

Dish racks

Dish racks come with different peg styles depending on the type of
glasses versus plates. The racks are loaded into the dishwasher with
the ability to remove them for storage. Thus, dish racks are a key
multipurpose tool for foodservice kitchens.

Food Service Logistics 34
Warewasher Styles

Styles of warewashers include under counter dishwashers, glass
washers, door type dishwashers, and conveyor dishwashers.

Under counter dishwashers are the most compact option and
resemble residential dishwashers. They are versatile in that they
can be freestanding or built in, like behind a bar. They can be low
temperature to save energy. While they look similar to residential
dishwashers, they clean at a much faster rate — 20 racks in a single
hour.

Glass washers come in several desigsn, including rotary,
conveyor, and door-type under counter. The door-type is similar,
if not identical, to the under counter dishwashers but is meant
mainly for glasses. Why would we want a glass washer?
Advantageous for bars and cafes that need a steady supply of
clean glasses without needing an employee dedicated to washing
dishes. Glass washers use lower water pressure than regular dish
washers so that they safely clean glasses.

Door type dishwashers are the most common commercial
dishwasher. You load dish racks with dirty dishes into the
washer. Different models wash different numbers of racks
(single rack versus double rack). If the door slides up, there is a
safety switch feature to turn off the cycle. Door type
dishwashers have a larger capacity than undercounter washers
which make them a better alternative in large resturants, but
they use more energy and more detergent.

Conveyor dishwashers are the largest available commercial
dishwasher. “Flight type continuous conveyor’ is the most
efficent and effective dishwasher for high volume foodservice,
cleaning up to 1,000 dishracks in a single day. You can choose
from low temperature and high temperature models, and
installation requires specialty hard-wiring due to its size and its
energy requirements.

© 2022 Veritense™

Food Service Logistics

35
© 2022 Veritense™

Commercial Sinks i. 4

Sinks are used throughout a foodservice kitchen for different =
needs.

Handwashing sink

The FDA issues the Model Food Code. This food code requires
at least 1 hand-sink inside of, or at the entrance to, a food prep
area. Hand-sinks should be easily accessible by employees that
work in food prep, food serving, and warewashing.

One compartment sink

A handwashing sink is a one compartment sink. However, there
may be additional one compartment sinks around the kitchen to
prep produce, soak pots and pans, or in a bar area.

Two compartment sink

Two compartment sinks are often used to thaw and prep meats
or frozen bagged sides, or to use as a vegetable sanitizing and ¥
prep station.

What type of foodservice system would need plenty of two
compartment sinks to thaw food items?

Three compartment sink

Three compartment sinks are used to wash, rinse, and
sanitize dishes.

Four compartment sink

Four compartment sinks are used to scrape food waste,
wash, rinse, and sanitize separately.

Food Service Logistics 36
© 2022 Veritense™

Food Holding and Warming

Countertop warmers are used in display cases and for soups and side dishes.

Strip warmers are used to keep food on the line, or in a buffet, at the correct temperature.
Heat lamps are placed over prepared food or at a carving station to keep them warm.

Drawer warmers are used to keep food warm and ready to serve.

Countertop warmer Strip warmer . Drawer warmer

Electric steam tables have food wells and can be used to display hot or cold foods.

Bain Marie is an electric steam table hooked up to a food rethermalizer to heat the water
keeping food wells hot. Bain Marie might also be used to thaw large amounts of frozen food or
for cooking.

Bain Marie Heater (food rethermalizer) can be used to heat sink water or to heat a Bain
Marie.

Cook and hold ovens cook food and then keep it hot until serving time without drying it out.

Electric steam table Bain Marie Bain Marie Heater Cook and hold oven

Refrigerated holding cabinet holds food at the correct cold temperature prior to serving.

Holding cabinets keep food at the right temperature.

Food Service Logistics 37
© 2022 Veritense™

Banquet carts can be heated or not. Non-heated banquet carts are often called “Queen Mary”
carts and have open sides. Heated banquet carts have doors and will keep plated dishes at the

correct temperature.

Meal delivery carts will keep foods at the right temperature during transport and may be used
to hold patient meal trays.

iL

tt

=
‘=
=
=
|

4

Refrigerated holding Holding cabinet Banquet cart Meal delivery cart
cabinet

Retarder proofers will refrigerate dough and then heat it for proofing.

Oven proofer combo will proof and then bake dough in the same equipment using different
controls.

Proofing cabinets are used for proofing bread products.

Retarder proofers Oven proofer combo Proofing cabinets

Food Service Logistics 38
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions (Equipment)

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your
first pass at applying the knowledge you’ve read and practiced in example calculations in a
question-and-answer format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your
notes.

1.

A hotel is hosting a gala for the regional dietetic association which includes a plated dinner
service. The chef has the staff begin preparing the menu items a week in advance, chilling
and freezing items to thaw the day before. On the day of the event, the kitchen staff cook
the items that don’t store well chilled or frozen. All of the food is prepared in the hotel kitchen
and transported to the ballroom on banquet carts for service. This is an example of a
delivery service system using and
foodservice systems.

A hospital kitchen provides meals for the entire health system. One group of employees is
responsible for prepping food in bulk and transporting it to satellite sites, like the long-term
rehabilitation center and the ambulatory care center, which has its own cafeteria. This is an

example of a foodservice system. The staff at the satellite centers
complete the cooking and assembly process before meal time and serve it. This is an
example of a delivery service system.

Another group of employees is responsible for prepping food to serve at the main hospital
cafeteria. General items are prepped and kept warm in holding carts and electric steam
tables. Specialty items are prepped to be cooked at specialty counters, including a sushi
counter and burger station. This is an example of a cafeteria service

style.
The final group of employees is responsible for patient meal service. The meal prep line
involves assembling thawed items onto trays, loading them onto meal delivery carts and

delivering the trays to patients. This is an example of

Employees that work in a food service system have a relatively even
workload throughout the day.

Employees that work ina food service system have a heavy workload
close to meal time.

Food Service Logistics 39
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions (Answers)

1.

A hotel is hosting a gala for the regional dietetic association which includes a plated dinner
service. The chef has the staff begin preparing the menu items a week in advance, chilling
and freezing items to thaw the day before. On the day of the event, the kitchen staff cook
the items that don’t store well chilled or frozen. All of the food is prepared in the hotel
kitchen, and transported to the ballroom on banquet carts for service. This is an example of
a centralized delivery service system using conventional and ready-prepared foodservice
systems.

A hospital kitchen provides meals for the entire health system. One group of employees is
responsible for prepping food in bulk and transporting it to satellite sites, like the long-term
rehabilitation center and the ambulatory care center, which has its own cafeteria. This is an
example of a ready-prepared foodservice system. The staff at the satellite centers complete
the cooking and assembly process before meal time and serve it. This is an example of a
decentralized delivery service system.

Another group of employees is responsible for prepping food to serve at the main hospital
cafeteria. General items are prepped and kept warm in holding carts and electric steam
tables. Specialty items are prepped to be cooked at specialty counters, including a sushi
counter and burger station. This is an example of a hollow square / free-flow / scramble
cafeteria service style.

The final group of employees is responsible for patient meal service. The meal prep line
involves assembling thawed items onto trays, loading them onto meal delivery carts, and

delivering the trays to patients. This is an example of tray service.

Employees that work in a ready-prepared for satellite sites food service system have a
relatively even workload throughout the day.

Employees that work in a cook-to-serve group for cafeteria food service system have a
heavy workload close to meal time.

Food Service Logistics 40
© 2022 Veritense™

Storage Requirements

In addition to proper temperature control, proper layout, humidity, and ventilation is important for
dry storage, refrigeration storage, and freezer storage.

Dry storage

Dry storage items include canned goods, baking supplies like flour and J 1]
sugar, other grains, and cereals. Dry storage areas should be kept clean
and well ventilated in order to prevent high humidity, mold, and bacterial
growth. The optimal temperature for dry storage is 50°F — 70°F with
humidity of 50-60%. Shelving should be at least 6” off the floor, aisles
should be wide enough for carts, and the area

f should be kept locked to prevent pilfering.

Foods should be stored off the floor and away

from the walls to maintain ventilation, and away
.. from heat sources, like hot vents, and light.

: Heat and light will decrease shelf life. Dry storage shelving has

minimum height requirements to prevent food from being too close to

the floor while also being away from the wall for pest control.

a Refrigerated storage

Refrigeration slows bacterial growth and should be kept between 32°F
and 40°F. Thermometers should be accurate and within 3°F. Open,
slotted shelving allows air circulation around shelves and walls which
helps maintain proper food temperatures. Doors should have a good seal
to maintain efficiency. Refrigerator doors often have plastic flaps that help
air stay inside.

Freezer storage

When frozen food is received, it should be stored frozen immediately.
Freezer storage space should be kept at 0°F or below and thermometers
should be accurate within 3°F. Just like refrigeration, freezers should
have open, slotted shelving for air circulation and doors should have a tight seal.

Food Service Logistics 41
© 2022 Veritense™

Ovens and Fryers

Ideally, a cooking method is fast, consistent, and even. The cooking time is fast, the heating is
consistent, and the cooking is even. You'll see these listed as advantages (or the lack of as
disadvantages) over and over again. Differentiate different types of ovens by their
disadvantages — when would you not want to use them, and any unique function they do play,
like for specialty foods (i.e. a pizza oven).

Standard oven

Also called a conventional oven, a standard oven has 2 heating
elements that heat the air inside the oven. Dishes closest to the active
heating element (at top or bottom) will cook faster.

Standard ovens are inexpensive, can be used to cook nearly anything,
and are easy to repair. Disadvantages include the inconsistent
heating, uneven cooking, and slow cook times.

Steam oven

A steam oven cooks with water vapor, and can maintain flavor and
nutrients of the food items. Cooking time is very fast, consistent, and
even. It is a healthy alternative to frying but cannot brown or crisp food
and shouldn’t be used for delicate foods.

Convection oven

In contrast to a standard oven, convection ovens circulate warm
air inside the oven for faster, even cooking and consistent
heating. These ovens can also cook at a lower temperature than
standard ovens, are affordable, and very versatile. However,
convection ovens cannot be used for all types of cuisine. There
are also specific convection ovens for bread items called bakery
convection ovens.

Food Service Logistics 42
© 2022 Veritense™

Rotary Oven

A rotary oven allows for bulk production of food items, particularly flour-based foods like bread.
Anything that cooks at the same temperature can go in — rolls, bread, cookies, and cake.
Furthermore, rotary ovens provide a compact solution in
contrast to several ovens, or even stacked ovens. Rotary
ovens offer uniform baking and even cooking to all items
compared to standard ovens where items closest to the
heating elements will cook faster and brown more. Rotary
ovens use an air distribution system to distribute warm air
to achieve the consistent cooking. Rotary ovens look like a
large walk-in chamber and have a special perforated tray.
To understand better, look up a video of rotary ovens
online.

Microwave oven

Microwave ovens cook faster than standard ovens and consume less
energy than ovens or stovetops. However, microwave ovens are
limited in the quantity of food they can cook and overcooking may lead
to soft and soggy food. You might find microwaves in satellite kitchens
and in self-service areas.

Combination oven

Combination ovens combine convection (circulated warm air) and
steam (water vapor). Advantages include faster cooking times and
consistent heating. However, combination ovens are very expensive.

+

re

Food Service Logistics 43
© 2022 Veritense™

Deck oven

Deck ovens have a heavy stone shelf (deck) that heats up. The food is placed on the deck,
allowing for fine control of heating (cooler at the top, hotter at the bottom). Some deck oven
models can be stacked (i.e. a double deck, pictured on the right below) or are for pizzas (i.e. a
pizza deck oven, pictured on the left below). Deck ovens are great for baking but have long
preheating times and the deck shelf must be reheated between items.

Rotisserie oven

Rotisserie ovens are used to slowly cook meat, particularly large
pieces of meat. You may have seen a rotisserie oven at a grocery
store for rotisserie chickens. These ovens prevent meat from
drying out because the meat retains its natural juices and the
rotation causes very even cooking. The downside, compared to
other methods of cooking meat, is that rotisserie ovens take a
long time.

Conveyor oven

Conveyor ovens force hot air up through a perforated sheet which
quickens the cooking time (called “impingement”). Cooking time is
very fast, heating is consistent, and cooking is even. The structure
allows for high output and less attention by workers. Models can also
be stacked to save floor space. However, conveyor ovens aren't ideal
for small items or delicate foods, have low clearance limits, and their
high heat and fast speed of cooking can deteriorate flavor and texture
in some foods. Have you ever been to a build your own pizza
restaurant? Did they have a conveyor oven to cook pizza?

Food Service Logistics 44
© 2022 Veritense™

Fryers

Gas fryers use a building’s gas line to heat the fryer and heat up faster than electric fryers.
Electric fryers run off electricity and aren’t ideal for large batches or repeat batches of food
because the temperature will fall between batches.

Tube-style fryer Open-pot fryer Flat bottom fryer

Tube style fryers are used for frying onion rings, chicken, fish, or anything in a frying basket
(i.e. French fries, cheese sticks). The heating element is within the tubes and affixed to the fry
pot. This style fryer is heated by gas and has a better sediment zone than the other models. The
sediment zone keeps sediment separate from oil, which prolongs oil life and prevents poor
flavor of food. This style is harder to clean than open pot fryers.

Open pot fryers can use gas or electricity. They are easy to clean and can be used for nearly
any type of food. These fryers have a shallow sediment zone that can get clogged easily so it is
best to use for low-sediment foods. They can be used for basket fried foods like French fries,
hash browns, and frozen foods.

Flat bottom fryers are heated from below by gas and are best for items that will float in oil at
the top, such as donuts and battered foods. There is no sediment zone, which is why you only
use lighter foods with minimum sediment. These are also called shallow fryers or donut fryers.
They may have a tray that hinges into the oil and easily comes out.

Fryers can also be classified by floor
models or countertop. You can imagine
in a cafeteria setup; you might want to
have a countertop fryer that is making
fresh food during meal service rather
than holding fried foods at serving
temperature.

Food Service Logistics 45
© 2022 Veritense™

Commercial ranges

Gas ranges have open burners and dials that allow for precise cooking temperature control.
Immediate heat from open burners leads to shorter cook times. Gas is typically more efficient
than electric models with lower operational costs, unless gas prices in your area are high. Gas
models require special hookups to the buildings gas line which may make installation more
expensive than an electric range. British Thermal Units (BTUs) measure gas usage.

Electric ranges have protective tops above tubes with metal elements. Compared to gas
ranges, electric ranges are easier and cheaper to install. With improvements in technology,
electric ranges are more common commercially than
they used to be.

Induction surfaces are an additional consideration that
don't require a fume hood and don't emit heat into the
air which frees up space in the kitchen and keeps the
kitchen cooler. Cookware with induction must contain a
ferrous metal (i.e. cast iron) and not all foods can be
cooked in that type of cookware. Considerations in
deciding on an electric range to purchase include
voltage, conductive versus inductive heat, NSF rating,
warranties, steel gauge, and wall and floor clearance.

Ranges can also vary in their base. Ovens are
commonly the base of ranges though a refrigerated
unit or open/closed storage unit where the oven would
typically be are alternate options.

Work Tables

Work tables differ in many things, including their stainless-steel gauge, bottom shelf, edges and
high risers, and top.

Material

More durable work tables cost more money so it’s important to consider what type of activities
will be done in what areas. Commercial kitchens typically have an assembly area, cold prep
area, and butcher area. To optimize those prep areas, you might also include handwashing
sinks, undershelf sorting, and other options. Durability of the stainless steel (the gauge) is
important to consider before purchasing.

Food Service Logistics 46
© 2022 Veritense™

There are also 2 types of stainless steel used: Type 304 and Type 430. Type 304 is highly
resistant to corrosion and rust, and is durable, easy to sanitize, and tolerates moisture. It has
high chromium nickel and is not magnetic. Type 430 is lower grade than Type 304, and includes
iron so it is less resistant to corrosion. It’s used for produce prep, mixing ingredients, and
plating. It’s slightly magnetic.

Increasing
durability

18 gauge 16 gauge 14 gauge
Salad and sandwich prep General use Butcher use, most durable
General sorting and assembly Stands up to pounding
Susceptible to dents and dings and chopping

— no pounding or chopping

Storage

An open-base table is optimal when you have large storage bins that won't fit on a shelf. An
undershelf is optimal when you have smaller things to store, like a half bin or bowls.

Top and Edge

Stainless steel tops are good for general work. Poly top is often used for delis, meat counters,
and bakeries because it doubles as a cutting board. Wood top is also an option.

Food Service Logistics 47
© 2022 Veritense™

Square/flat edges allow worktables to be placed next to each other. Rounded edges make the
table easier to clean, especially if there are high rises. Countertop or marine edges have a drip-
containing ridge and are optimal for butcher tables. Bakers tables are typically wood top with
high risers and rounded corners to keep flour within the space, while also being easy to clean.

Food Service Logistics 48
© 2022 Veritense™

Facility Specifications
Flooring Selection

Why do you need to know about flooring requirements for kitchen and food service? As a
foodservice manager, you may be in charge of designing a new foodservice space and/or
updating existing space to meet quality standards. To select the appropriate type of flooring for
your operation, you need to understand the factors to consider, as well as the standards they
need to meet. I'll start by presenting the factors to consider and then talk about examples that
meet these. The exam may ask you about certain features of a flooring type, (i.e. “What does
resiliency refer to?”) or it may ask you to select the best flooring choice given a certain situation.

“Regular factors” apply to floors anywhere. “Unique factors” are flooring factors unique to
foodservice.

Table 2. Factors affecting flooring selection

Regular Factors Unique Factors
Equipment Water
Foot traffic Food waste

Grease
Cleaning products

Equipment — if a space has heavy equipment, it needs flooring that can accommodate not only
the weight but the way that heavy equipment is moved

Foot traffic — different flooring types may scratch or wear away with high traffic and may be
dangerous when wet. Nonslip surfaces are particularly important for foodservice operations. The
largest number of employee injuries in kitchens is from slippery floors.°

Water — foodservice flooring areas often contain drains and not all flooring materials can
accommodate the sloping floors

Food waste, grease, and cleaning are all related — the flooring material in a foodservice
operation must be able to withstand regular cleanings, including specialty cleaners meant to
clean up grease

As we move into typical flooring materials used in foodservice operations, keep these 4 things in
mind: safety, sanitation, comfort, and aesthetics. I’ve grouped resiliency with aesthetics, but it’s
also relevant to safety and sanitation. A cracked floor isn't safe, aesthetically pleasing, or a good
situation for maintaining sanitation. Plus, you'll have to pay for it to be fixed.

4 things to consider with foodservice flooring

Safety and slip Sanitation and Comfort and worker | Aesthetics and
resistance infection control fatigue durability
Slip resistant material | Pre-treatment Soft underlayers Resiliency

Seams and grout Protective coatings

Food Service Logistics 49
© 2022 Veritense™

As | mentioned before, the exam may ask you about certain features of a flooring type, (i.e.
“What does resiliency refer to?”) or it may ask you to select the best flooring choice given a
certain situation or requirement. I'll provide a general description of each flooring type here.

Quarry tile |
ae: Quarry tile
Quarry tile, also called non-porcelain ceramic tile, is oa —
A

common and an industry standard. It’s natural
material, cheaper than porcelain tile, and combined
with epoxy grout. It’s slip-resistant and often paired
with rubber mats, especially for worker fatigue.
Standard cleaners are ok to use on quarry tile, but
the grout lines need to be sealed every year to avoid
bacterial growth.

J

Natural stone and tile

Natural stone tile and brick is another option, often used in cafes, delis, and restaurants where
the kitchen area is visible to customers. Slate and granite are easier to maintain than other
natural stone in terms of cleaning. Brick is porous and must be sealed twice a year. Importantly,
polished tile can be incredibly slippery when wet.

Epoxy flooring

Epoxy flooring is a protective coating on concrete flooring and is incredibly strong - strong
enough to be used in manufacturing facilities and airplane hangars, while sanitary enough to be
used in labs. A slip-resistant coating can be used to improve slip resistance or rubber mats can
be added. It’s easy to maintain with standard cleaners and resistant to abrasion, physical
impact, and chemicals. Concrete floor is hard so it’s important that measures are taken for
comfort and worker fatigue.

Vinyl/PVC flooring

Vinyl/PVC flooring can be vinyl sheet or tile. There are luxury options, called luxury vinyl tile
(LVT) that provide flexible design options. Vinyl flooring is good for customer areas, even if
highly trafficked. Commercial vinyl flooring is sometimes called “resilient” flooring.

Vinyl flooring is waterproof and slip-resistant. It can be pretreated for microbial infection control.
There are minimal seams and no grout which helps with cleaning, though it might require a
special cleaner. Vinyl flooring can also include a silver ion core which is antimicrobial (useful
also in operating rooms).

Vinyl takes on the properties of the subfloor, so installing vinyl flooring over a soft layer can
reduce dinnerware breakage and be better for reducing worker fatigue. Finally, for aesthetics
and durability, the synthetic polymers in vinyl make it resilient with maximal durability. This
flooring is resistant to abrasion, chemicals, grease, and physical impact.

Food Service Logistics 50
© 2022 Veritense™

Lighting Requirements

Why bother with lighting requirements? Because if you can’t see it, it’s probably not clean or
safe.

Lighting helps to:

1. Create a safe and welcoming environment
2. Optimize visibility

3. Provide safe and efficient traffic patterns
4. Minimize operating costs

Lighting helps with warmth, clarity, and sanitation. It
also effects productivity and worker safety. As a
manager, you can minimize operating costs by using
similar types of lighting components for easy
maintenance and save money by increasing sanitation
and safety (i.e. less workers compensation).

Lighting requirements are communicated in “foot-
candles”.

1 foot-candle = illuminance cast on a 1 x 1 foot
surface 1 foot away by a 1-candela light source.

1 foot away
An overcast day is about 100 foot-candles while a
sunny day is about 10,000 foot-candles. 1 lumen

. . . . oa (1 candle)
Because lighting has implications for both safety and

sanitation, the food code has lighting requirements for different foodservice areas. Fill out the
lighting requirement table worksheet.

Table 3. Lighting Requirements for Food Service Areas

Area Intensity Distance
Walk-in refrigeration, dry food storage, and all areas 110 lux 75 cm (380 in)
during cleaning (10-ft candles) above floor
Inside reach-in and under-counter refrigerators 220 lux -
20-ft candles

Self-service food areas and areas where packaged 220 lux
food is sold (20-ft candles)
Areas for handwashing, dishwashing, equipment and 220 lux 75 cm (380 in)

utensil storage, and toilet rooms (20-ft candles) above floor
Preparation areas working with food, knives, slicers, 540 lux -
grinders, or saws
Source: National Restaurant Association Education Foundation. ServSafe Coursebook. 6th ed. Chicago: NRA;
2012:11-16

Food Service Logistics 51
© 2022 Veritense™

You're working on the kitchen area design and need to decide which types of work tables will be
in each area. There is no single right answer for each one — you're actively learning by applying
what you’ve read. Provide rationale for your choice when applicable and check your answers on
the next page.

Storage

Top

Lighting

e What areas require the most lighting? The least?
e What is the range of lighting requirements in a foodservice kitchen and storage
space?

Food Service Logistics 52
© 2022 Veritense™

[ANSWERS _| Salad Prer ‘Bakery  ————s(| Butcher
18 gauge 16 or 14 gauge 14 gauge (heaviest

Type 430 OK Type 304 — many Type 304 — don’t
bakery tools are want knives to dent
metal and magnetic tables

Storage Undershelf Undershelf for half Undershelf
bins
= Sachse emer temo
can in the kitchen

[Top  ——C™—C—s| Stainless Si éPolyorwood
20 — 50+ foot candles | 20 — 50+ foot candles | > ———E foot candles

Motion Economy

Motion economy is focused on improving manual work in manufacturing and foodservice in
order to reduce fatigue and unnecessary movements.

These improvements can be accomplished in three overall ways:

1. Workplace arrangement
2. Tool and equipment designs
3. Human body motion patterns

Maximum Normal Normal
working area working working
area area

Left hand Right hand

Food Service Logistics 53
© 2022 Veritense™

Workplace arrangements — materials and tools should be arranged to support the appropriate
sequence of motions with pre-positioning to reduce the need for searching. Defined and fixed
stations should be provided for habit formation — such as a dedicated bakery table with
undershelf storage for commonly used ingredients. Finally, proper illumination without glare is
needed to avoid eye strain. In foodservice systems, the food code lighting requirement would be
the minimum.

Tool and equipment design — ergonomic design and comfort grips can reduce worker fatigue

Human body motion patterns — should be simultaneous, symmetrical, natural, rhythmic, and
habitual’

HVAC

HVAC stands for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning, and includes all the different systems,
machines, and technology used for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning of indoor spaces. In
foodservice, we’re mostly concerned about the ventilation portion of HVAC. Ventilation systems
work on a loop, taking air from the workspace, removing the exhaust, and mixing the recycled
air with outside air before venting it back into the workspace. There may be dedicated exhausts
for the cooking area (from the fume hood to a specific exhaust) and from restrooms.

Supply air comes from outside of the building. Outdoor air is sucked into the system and
supplies air into the workspace. Air from the workspace is filtered into exhaust and return air.
Exhaust exits the building while return air mixes with supply air and is recirculated. Be familiar
with the definition of supply air, return air, and exhaust air.

Supply Air Supply Air EN

Return Air

Kitchen

Food Service Logistics 54
© 2022 Veritense™

Safety

Safety categories you need to know for the RD exam include different types of fires and how to
put them out, what contributes to fire risk in the kitchen, workplace safety, and safety
investigations. Note that OSHA investigates workplace accidents.

Workplace Safety

Workplace safety falls into general categories, including strains and sprains, slips, trips and
falls, burns and scalds, knives and cuts, electrical hazards, hazardous chemicals, fire hazards,
heat hazards, machine guarding, and heat and cold exposure.

Particularly dangerous equipment will have guards in place and may be restricted by local law
with persons under a certain age prohibited from operating the machinery (usually 18 years).'
You should be familiar with these restrictions. For example, a teenager may be old enough to
work at a sub sandwich shop but not old enough to operate the deli meat cutting machine.

For storage, heavier items should be on lower shelves and lighter items on top shelves. To
prevent strains and sprains, frequently used items should be stacked to waist level.

To prevent slips, trips, and falls, employees should wear appropriate nonslip footwear and use
no-skid waxes. Hallways should not be cluttered or obstructed, and items should only be carried
at a height over which the employee can see.

To prevent cold exposure, employees loading material in refrigerator or freezer areas should
wear appropriate protective equipment. Condensation can cause floors to become wet and
slippery. Floors in walk-in refrigerators and freezers should be nonslip and free of clutter.

Electrical hazards include worn electric cords, damaged extension cords, ungrounded outlets,
faulty equipment wiring, damaged connectors, wet clean-up processes, and unsafe work
practices. Fire hazards include poor housekeeping, unemptied grease traps, dirty air ducts,
improper storage of flammable items, and faulty or frayed electrical cords.

Proper uniforms in the kitchen, including long-sleeved cotton shirts and pants, a clean, dry
apron of the proper length, and proper use of protective gear, like oven mitts, are important to
prevent burns. Steam burns and grease burns are of particular concern in kitchens.

e Ona piece of paper, write out these different categories of worker safety with examples.
Emergency Preparedness

Food service operations in the US should have disaster plans in place in the event of an
emergency, including hospitals and long-term care facilities. Review the following articles to
prepare for the exam:

Nutrition Care Manual: Disaster Preparedness (https://bit.ly/S6oyatb)

Food Safety in a Disaster or Emergency: https://www.foodsafety.gov/keep-food-safe/food-
safety-in-disaster-or-emergency

Food Service Logistics 55
© 2022 Veritense™

Fire Safety

Different fire extinguishers are used for different types of fire. You need to know generally what
type of fire extinguisher is used for which type of fire. The additional information is here to help
you create those connections rather than trying to brute memorize it.

Table 4. Types of fires and the fire suppression technique

Fire Class _| Description | Examples Fire Suppression Techniques

Class A Combustible | Wood, paper, fabric, Water extinguisher, foam extinguisher, wet
materials trash chemical suppression

Class B Flammable Gasoline or natural gas | Water stream not used because it will scatter
liquids and the fuel and spread flames
gases Dry chemical extinguisher, carbon dioxide

extinguisher
Foam extinguisher for flammable liquids only

Class C Electrical Short-circuited Water not used because it’s conductive
fires machinery or
overloaded electrical Ammonium sulfate or carbon dioxide fire
cables extinguishers can be used
Class D Flammable Metal “sawdust” can Dry powder extinguishers
metals combust and burn in

contact with air or water
Class K Cooking oils | K for “kitchen fires” Class K fire extinguishers are wet chemical
and fats and will turn oil into a foam. Water stream not

used because it will cause the fuel to scatter.
Can also smother small kitchen fires with fire
blankets.

Note that there are more types of fires than just Class A combustible (which is the only one to
use water with). Other fire extinguishers include wet chemical suppression, dry chemical
suppression, foam smothering, and dry powder smothering. Non-water fire extinguishers work
by absorbing heat and/or smothering the fire. Chemical suppression extinguishers work through
chemical reactions that use up (i.e. remove) oxygen. The ‘Fire Triangle’ consists of oxygen,
heat, and fuel. Fire suppression techniques address at least 1 of these components.

e Water extinguishers: Used for Class A fires to remove heat from burning materials

e Carbon dioxide extinguisher: Used for Class B and C fires, the carbon dioxide blankets the fuel and
displaces oxygen and can also remove heat by cold discharge.

e Chemical foam extinguisher: Used for Class A and Class B- flammable liquids (not gas). The foam
blankets the fire, preventing oxygen from reaching it.

e Dry chemical extinguishers interrupt the chemical reaction between the 3 elements in the fire
triangle. Regular dry chemical extinguishers only work with Class B and C, and can exacerbate Class
A fires. There are multipurpose, dry chemical fire extinguishers that can be used in Class A, B, and C
fires — these are the red fire extinguishers you commonly see and may be labeled as ABC
extinguishers.

e Dry powder extinguishers separate fuel and oxygen or remove heat using sodium chloride, sodium
carbonate, copper, graphite, or other materials. They are for Class D fires only.

e Wet chemical extinguishers create a soapy foam blanket that excludes air (removing oxygen) and
cools the fuel below its ignition temperature. Wet chemical extinguishers were developed for Class K
fires but some may be used on Class A fires in kitchens. They are silver.

Food Service Logistics 56
© 2022 Veritense™

Sanitation

Sanitizers are chemicals and need proper storage and training on their usage. In the US,
chemical sanitizers and antimicrobial agents are regulated. For sanitizers and antimicrobial
agents used on food, food product contact surfaces, and nonfood product contact surfaces are
registered with the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency),

The FDA (Food and Drug Administration) evaluates residues from sanitizer use that may enter
the food supply. The FDA maintains the Code of Federal Regulations with approved no-rinse
food contact sanitizers, nonfood contact sanitizers, and their maximum usage levels.

The USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) maintains the USDA List of Proprietary
Substances and Nonfood Product Contact Compounds, which includes antimicrobial
compounds used in meat, poultry, and other products regulated by the USDA FSIS (Food
Safety and Inspection Service)

Cleaning, sanitizing, and disinfecting are often used synonymously but mean different things.
Cleaning physically removes debris by scrubbing, washing, and rinsing. It may include soap,
detergent, or water.

Sanitizers

Sanitizers are products that kill 99.9% of germs. They reduce, but may not eliminate,
microorganisms to the “safe level” determined by public health codes. In foodservice, we
sanitize food and food contact surfaces.

Sanitizers include chlorine compounds, quaternary ammonium compounds, and iodine
compounds. Different sanitizers have different usage requirements because different
temperatures or pH’s affect the effectiveness.

Chlorine. In foodservice, chlorine must be “food grade” and not contain any fragrances,
thickeners, or additives. Chlorine is corrosive to metal surfaces and has human safety concerns
due to skin irritation and mucous membrane damage. Chlorine’s effectiveness is affected by pH,
temperature, and soil load but not by water hardness. Chlorine is effective against fungi and
bacterial spores.

Quaternary Ammonium. Quaternary ammonium compounds, or “quats”, are commonly used in
foodservice because they are effective against bacteria, mold, yeast, and viruses, and are
active and stable across a large temperature range. Quats shouldn’t be used with hard water or
heavy soil. Rinsing after cleaning is important because if any detergent is left on a dish, quats
will react and form dangerous gases. An advantage of quats are that they are non-irritating,
non-corrosive, and stable across a relatively wide pH range.

lodine. lodine compounds, called “iodophors” are active against bacteria, mold, fungi, viruses,
yeasts, and protozoans. They evaporate at 120 °F and thus, can’t be used with high
temperature water. lodophors shouldn't be used with basic pH water and may stain plastics
yellow/brown.

Food Service Logistics 57
© 2022 Veritense™

For the following statements, write in chlorine, quaternary ammonium, or iodine where correct.

Check your answers on the following pages.

Affected by water hardness
Affected by pH

Affected by water temperature
Works against protozoans

Works against bacteria

Works against spores
Corrosive

Affected by soil load

PH stable

Temperature stable

Not affected by water hardness

Factors Affecting Sanitizers

e Sanitizer concentration (too much = toxic, too little = ineffective)

e Ideal temperature
e Contact time required
e Water pH and water hardness

e Adequate cleaning (to reduce soil) and rinsing (to reduce detergent residue)
e Material being cleaned, if inanimate (plastic, metal, wood, glass)

e Microbial load
e Type of microorganism present

Training

Managers should make sure that employees are trained on which sanitizer to use when, how to
mix sanitizers to the proper concentration, how to test the concentration and at what
temperature, how to use the sanitizer, how to store the sanitizer when not in use, and chemical

safety considerations if something goes wrong.

e Write out the advantages and disadvantages (or considerations to make) for each of the

3 sanitizers discussed.

Food Service Logistics 58
Sanitizer Answers

Affected by water hardness
Affected by pH

Affected by water temperature
Works against protozoans
Works against bacteria

Works against spores
Corrosive

Affected by soil load

PH stable

Temperature stable

Not affected by water hardness

Sustainability

© 2022 Veritense™

Quats

lodine, chlorine
lodine, chlorine
lodine

lodine, quats
Chlorine
Chlorine
Quats, chlorine
Quats

Quats

Chlorine

Sustainability includes practices used to meet the needs of a current generation without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.

In foodservice, water and energy efficiency, green building materials, HVAC, sustainable food
products, material recycling, and waste management are the 7 key aspects of sustainability.
Integrated waste management systems focus on reducing the amount of waste that goes to
landfills through 1) source reduction, 2) recycling and 3) waste incineration.

Sustainability in food products includes a focus on local purchasing, and sustainability in food
processing, packaging, and selling. The most commonly recycled item in foodservice operations
is cardboard, because almost every product arrives in some form of cardboard carton.' Solid
waste from foodservice operations is 60-70% packaging, including napkins, straws, and other
customer waste, with 30-40% from food production and preparation areas. Which area of
foodservice produces more solid waste — customer use or food production/preparation?

Food preparation is the highest energy consumer in foodservice. HVAC, sanitation, lighting, and

refrigeration follow it.

Decreased energy use — carefully planned windows to improve air circulation, digital timing
controls on air conditioners, water heaters, and refrigerators, as well as energy-efficient
equipment, and farm-to-fork programs can all reduce energy use.

Sustainable design — using recycled building materials, recycled paper, and biodegradable
utensils in production, while recycling any plastic, paper, and cardboard material outputs. Note
that cardboard is the most commonly recycled material in foodservice operations
because the majority of items purchased for inventory arrive in cardboard boxes. It’s
important to have an accessible recycling system, both in the kitchen and in the exterior waste
management location, to handle cardboard for adequate recycling.

Grow your own — some restaurants and other foodservice businesses are growing their own
vegetables, fruits, and herbs to minimize the effect of purchasing, transport, logistics, and

Food Service Logistics 59
© 2022 Veritense™

storage on the environment. Restaurant gardens also contribute to green space and water run-
off control.

Waste management - this is related to inventory management. Using data to accurately
estimate what the department needs and then buying and storing only that much results in less
waste. Businesses can also partner with suppliers to reduce the amount of packaging used in
shipping supplies. Careful menu planning can also help reduce inventory waste by analyzing the
performance of different items on the menu and reducing the menu offerings to only high quality
and high performing items to reduce the variety of ingredients that need to be kept in stock.
Simple steps like installing a can crusher at prep stations will facilitate aluminum recycling.

Purchasing in-season — by purchasing produce in-season, restaurants aren’t supporting long-
range shipping that harms the environment. In-season purchasing can be done at the local level
by buying product from local farms, dairies, or vineyards to save money on packaging,
transportation, and storage, while also being able to offer customers “farm-to-fork” or “farm
fresh” items and support their local economy.

Foodservice operations can partake in Energy Star and Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) sustainability programs.

e List the 7 aspects of foodservice sustainability.

e List the 5 ways a foodservice department can contribute to sustainability.

e Your boss wants you to lead a new sustainability initiative for the foodservice
department. Brainstorm how you can improve sustainability in each of the foodservice
subsystems (procurement, production, distribution and service, sanitation, maintenance),
using the 5 ways to improve sustainability listed previously.

Food Service Logistics 60
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Group 2)

Answer these practice questions using the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™ that you read about in
Chapter 2 and 3 of the Study Smarter Method for the RD-Exam section. Instead of answering these
questions using your memory and logic, use the study guide text and/or your own research to determine
which answer is correct (and why), and why the other answers are incorrect. Pay attention to the question
itself, and be sure you know what the question is asking. There are answers with explanations following.
If this is your first set of practice questions, go back and skim Chapters 2 and 3 in the Study Smarter
Method for the RD-Exam section to remind yourself of the types of questions and how to answer them.

1. The kitchen in your foodservice department relies on previously cooked food that is frozen,
thawed to room temperature, and heated for service. What type of equipment would you
expect to find in this kitchen?

a. Two-compartment sinks
b. Conveyor dishwasher
c. Heat lamps

d. Proofing cabinets

2. Which of the following specifications for a dry storage room are correct?
a. 50-70 degrees F, 60-70% humidity, shelving 6” off the floor
b. 60-74 degrees F, 50-60% humidity, shelving 6” off the floor
c. 50-70 degrees F, 50-60% humidity, shelving 9” off the floor
d. 50-70 degrees F, 50-60% humidity, shelving 6” off the floor

3. Compared to a conventional oven, steam ovens have cooking times,
heating, and cooking.
a. Faster, more consistent, more even
b. Longer, more consistent, more even
c. Faster, less consistent, less even
d. Longer, less consistent, less even

4. You want to buy a fryer for the foodservice kitchen. You will be using it for large batches of
food and need it to be easy to clean. Which type of fryer would be best?
a. Electric, open-pot
b. Electric, tube-style
c. Gas, open-pot
d. Gas, tube-style

5. You are ordering new butcher prep tables for the commercial kitchen. What type and gauge
of stainless steel should you look for?
a. Type 304, 14 gauge
b. Type 430, 14 gauge
c. Type 304, 18 gauge
d. Type 430, 18 gauge

Food Service Logistics 61
© 2022 Veritense™

6. What are the lighting requirements for an area with a butcher table and produce prep
station?
a. 10-foot candles
b. 20-foot candles
c. 50-foot candles
d. 75-foot candles

7. Which of the following does NOT reflect the principles of motion economy?
a. Butcher knives with comfort grips
b. Worktable with common ingredients stored on an undershelf
c. Commonly used items within normal working area reach
d. Asymmetric tabletop storage reflecting hand dominance

8. Workspace air comes from outside and is filtered into and
a. Exhaust, return air
b. Supply air, return air
c. Exhaust, supply air
d. None of the above

9. Which of the following policies would improve workplace safety?
a. Storing heavier items on top shelves
b. Checking for electrical hazards before mopping
c. Stacking frequently used items at waist level
d. BandC

10. You are the director of foodservice at a large hospital. There is a snowstorm and power has
gone out. Which of the following is false?
a. Refrigerators will keep food cold for 4 hours if unopened
b. A full freezer will keep temperature for 48 hours
c. At-risk foods that exceed 40 degrees F for more than 2 hours should be discarded
d. Perishable items can be placed outside in the snow to keep them cold

11. The power to your food service kitchen was out for 6 hours. The power is back on, but the
refrigerator and freezer temperatures aren’t back to normal yet.
a. Discard perishable refrigerated food
b. Discard frozen food that contains ice crystals
c. Refreeze frozen food that is between 40 to 50 degrees F
d. AandB

Food Service Logistics 62
© 2022 Veritense™

12. What type of fire extinguisher should be kept close to the fryer and stove in a commercial
kitchen?
a. ClassA
b. Class B
c. Class D
d. Class K

13. The approves no-rinse sanitizers used on produce and the approves
antimicrobial compounds that can be used in meat.
a. FDA, USDA
b. FSIS, FDA
c. FSIS, USDA
d. USDA, FDA

14. What type of sanitizer can be used with hard water?
a. Chlorine
b. Quaternary ammonium
c. lodine
d. BandC

15. lf you are concerned about viruses, what type of sanitizer should you use?
a. Chlorine
b. Quaternary ammonium
c. lodine
d. BorC

16. What foodservice unit produces the most solid waste (non-recyclable)?
a. Procurement
b. Production
c. Service
d. Maintenance

17. Which of the following examples would be classified as a sustainability effort?
a. Careful menu planning and use of standardized recipes
b. Switching to from plastic to compostable plates and utensils for customer service
c. Purchasing in-season produce
d. All of the above

Food Service Logistics 63
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Group 2) Answers

1. The kitchen in your foodservice department relies on previously cooked food that is frozen, thawed to
room temperature, and heated for service. What type of equipment would you expect to find in this
kitchen?

a. Two-compartment sinks
b. Conveyor dishwasher
c. Heat lamps

d. Proofing cabinets

Answer: A. This question is describing a ready-prepared (or cook/freeze) operation. Because foods are
frozen, and then heated for service (and the question specifically mentions thawing), you would expect
this kitchen to have a large capacity for thawing foods, such as two-compartment sinks. Conveyor
dishwashers are the largest available commercial dishwashers — the question does not mention capacity
for dishwashing. Heat lamps are used to keep meats at carving stations warm and does not apply to this
scenario. Heating equipment this kitchen might have, however, include a Bain Marie, which is an electric
steam table that can be used to keep food warm or to thaw large amounts of frozen food, or a cook and
hold oven to cook foods and keep hot until serving. A proofing cabinet is used to proof bread dough and
would be expected at a pizza restaurant or bakery.

2. Which of the following specifications for a dry storage room are correct?
a. 50-70 degrees F, 60-70% humidity, shelving 6” off the floor
b. 60-74 degrees F, 50-60% humidity, shelving 6” off the floor
c. 50-70 degrees F, 50-60% humidity, shelving 9” off the floor
d. 50-70 degrees F, 50-60% humidity, shelving 6” off the floor

Answer: D. Dry storage rooms should be clean and well-ventilated, with optimal temperature of 50 — 70
degrees F and humidity kept at 50 —- 60% to prevent mold and bacterial growth. Shelves should be at
least 6” off the floor and away from the walls to maintain ventilation. There should not be heat, light, or
vents close to where units are stored. What are the optimal specifications for refrigerated storage and
freezer storage? How accurate do thermometers need to be for freezer storage? Why?

3. Compared to a conventional oven, steam ovens have cooking times, heating, and
cooking.
a. Faster, more consistent, more even
b. Longer, more consistent, more even
c. Faster, less consistent, less even
d. Longer, less consistent, less even

Answer: A. Conventional, or standard ovens, are inexpensive and easy to repair, but have longer
cooking times, inconsistent heating, and uneven cooking. Steam ovens cook with water vapor and have
very fast cooking times with consistent and even heating and cooking. However, they cannot be used for
delicate foods, and they do not brown or crisp foods. Answer choice D compares conventional ovens to
steam ovens. Compare standard ovens and steam ovens to convention ovens and microwave ovens.

Food Service Logistics 64
© 2022 Veritense™

4. You want to buy a fryer for the foodservice kitchen. You will be using it for large batches of food and
need it to be easy to clean. Which type of fryer would be best?
a. Electric, open-pot
b. Electric, tube-style
c. Gas, open-pot
d. Gas, tube-style

Answer: C. Because you are using large batches, you should use a gas fryer because the temperature of
oil in electric fryers will decrease between batches. Because you need a fryer that is easy to clean, you
should avoid tube-style fryers (which are typically or always gas) and select an open-pot fryer. Flat bottom
fryers are easy to clean, are typically gas and can only be used for specific items like donuts or battered
foods.

5. You are ordering new butcher prep tables for the commercial kitchen. What type and gauge of
stainless steel should you look for?
a. Type 304, 14 gauge
b. Type 430, 14 gauge
c. Type 304, 18 gauge
d. Type 430, 18 gauge

Answer: A. Type 304 stainless steel is durable, easy to sanitize, and resistant to corrosion and rust.
Type 430 is lower grade and is used for prep work, plating, and ingredient mixing. Lower gauge stainless
steel has higher durability. 18 gauge would be used for prep and sorting/assembly, but nothing requiring
pounding or chopping. Which answer choice would you use for a salad prep table or a plating table?

6. What are the lighting requirements for an area with a butcher table and produce prep station?
a. 10-foot candles
b. 20-foot candles
c. 50-foot candles
d. 75-foot candles

Answer: C. Lighting in areas working with food, knives, and slicers should be 50-foot candles (540 lux).
Lighting for walk-in refrigeration, dry food storage, and areas being cleaned is 10-foot candles with lights
30 in (75 cm) above the floor. Lighting for reach-in and under-counter refrigerators, self-service food
areas with packaged foods, handwashing and dishwashing areas, equipment storage, and toilet rooms is
20-foot candles.

7. Which of the following does NOT reflect the principles of motion economy?
a. Butcher knives with comfort grips
b. Worktable with common ingredients stored on an undershelf
c. Commonly used items within normal working area reach
d. Asymmetric tabletop storage reflecting hand dominance

Answer: D. Motion economy principles include workplace arrangements that support appropriate motion sequence
with pre-positioning, habit formation, and are properly illuminated to reduce glare; ergonomic designs and comfort
grips to reduce worker fatigue; and support simultaneous, symmetrical, natural, rhythmic, and habitual human body
motion patterns. While asymmetric tabletop storage with common ingredients stored on the right for a right-handed
baker may be a specific example of having commonly used items within normal area reach, the asymmetry is in
contrast with general defined motion economy principles. Did you find this question tricky or overly specific? When
you encounter questions like these, remember that you are searching for the best answer.

Food Service Logistics 65
© 2022 Veritense™

8. Workspace air comes from outside and is filtered into and
a. Exhaust, return air
b. Supply air, return air
c. Exhaust, supply air
d. None of the above

Answer: A. Supply air is outdoor air sucked into the HVAC system and supplies air into the workspace.
The workspace air is then filtered into exhaust air and return air. Exhaust air exits the building completely,
but return air mixes with supply air and is recirculated.

9. Which of the following policies would improve workplace safety?
a. Storing heavier items on top shelves
b. Checking for electrical hazards before mopping
c. Stacking frequently used items at waist level
d. BandC

Answer: D. Heavy items should be stored on lower shelves with lighter items on top shelves. It is
important to check for electrical hazards such as worn electric cords, damaged extension cords,
ungrounded outlets, faulty equipment wiring, damaged connectors before beginning wet cleaning, like
mopping. To prevent strains and sprains, stack frequently accessed items at waist level. What are other
workplace safety policies?

10. You are the director of foodservice at a large hospital. There is a snowstorm and power has gone out.
Which of the following is false?
a. Refrigerators will keep food cold for 4 hours if unopened
b. A full freezer will keep temperature for 48 hours
c. At-risk foods that exceed 40 degrees F for more than 2 hours should be discarded
d. Perishable items can be placed outside in the snow to keep them cold

Answer: D. You should not place perishable foods outside in the snow. Instead, you should make ice by
filling buckets, empty containers, and cans with water and placing them outside to freeze. The ice can
then be used in refrigerators, freezers, and coolers. If refrigerators and freezers are kept closed,
refrigerators will keep food cold for 4 hours and a full freezer will hold temperature for 48 hours (24 hours
if it is half full). At-risk foods such as refrigerate dor frozen meat, poultry, fish, or eggs should be cooked to
their safe minimum internal temperature — and discarded if they were kept above 40 degrees for more
than 2 hours (or 1 hour if above 90 degrees, such as during a power outage in the summer). Read the
following articles if you haven't already: Nutrition Care Manual: Disaster Preparedness

(https://bit.ly/860yatb) and Food Safety in a Disaster or Emergency: https:/Awww.foodsafety.gov/keep-
food-safe/food-safety-in-disaster-or-emergency

Food Service Logistics 66
© 2022 Veritense™

11. The power to your food service kitchen was out for 6 hours. The power is back on, but the refrigerator
and freezer temperatures aren't back to normal yet.
a. Discard perishable refrigerated food
b. Discard frozen food that contains ice crystals
c. Refreeze frozen food that is between 40 to 50 degrees F
d. AandB

Answer: A. Because the power was out for more than 4 hours, you should discard perishable foods that
were in the refrigerator. However, for frozen foods, if the freezer thermometer is 40 degrees F or below,
the food can be refrozen. If the thermometer isn’t working or there isn’t one in the freezer, measure the
temperature of each food. Frozen food that is below 40 degrees or F can be safely re-frozen.
Alternatively, food that still has ice crystals can be refrozen. Answer choice B is wrong because you can
refreeze those items. Answer choice C is wrong because it should read 40 degrees F or below. Answer
choice D is wrong because answer choice B is wrong. Read the following articles if you haven't already:
Nutrition Care Manual: Disaster Preparedness (https://bit.ly/360yatb) and Food Safety in a Disaster or
Emergency: https://www.foodsafety.gov/keep-food-safe/food-safety-in-disaster-or-emergenc

12. What type of fire extinguisher should be kept close to the fryer and stove in a commercial kitchen?

a. ClassA
b. ClassB
c. Class D
d. Class K

Answer: D. Class K, or “kitchen fire” extinguishers, are used to extinguish cooking oils and fats. They are
wet chemical extinguishers that turn oil into foam. Water would cause the fuel to scatter and exacerbate
the situation. Describe Class A, B, C, and D extinguishers and what scenarios they are used for or write
your own questions for them.

13. The approves no-rinse sanitizers used on produce and the approves antimicrobial
compounds that can be used in meat.
a. FDA, USDA
b. FSIS, FDA
c. FSIS, USDA
d. USDA, FDA

Answer: A. The FDA evaluates residues from sanitizers that may enter the food supply, including no-
rinse sanitizers used for food contact and non-food contact sanitizers. The USDA maintains the list of
antimicrobial compounds that can be used in products regulated by the USDA FSIS, including meat and

poultry.

Food Service Logistics 67
© 2022 Veritense™

14. What type of sanitizer can be used with hard water?

a. Chlorine

b. Quaternary ammonium
c. lodine

d. BandC

Answer: A. Chlorine is affected by pH, temperature, and soil load. It is effective against fungi and
bacterial spores. Quaternary ammonium stable across large temperature and pH ranges but shouldn't be
used with hard water or heavy soil. All quaternary ammonium sanitizers require rinsing. They are effective
across bacteria, mold, yeast, and viruses. lodine compounds are active against bacteria, mold, fungi,
viruses, yeast, and protozoans. They cannot be used with high temperature water or with high pH levels.
Answer choice D would be correct if the question was “what types of sanitizers cannot be used with hard
water?”.

15. If you are concerned about viruses, what type of sanitizer should you use?

a. Chlorine

b. Quaternary ammonium
c. lodine

d. Borc

Answer: D. Quaternary ammonium or iodine can be used against viruses. Chlorine is effective against
fungi and bacterial spores. What are other considerations you would need to know to select between
quaternary ammonium or iodophors?

16. What foodservice unit produces the most solid waste (non-recyclable)?
a. Procurement
b. Production
c. Service
d. Maintenance

Answer: C. Nearly 60-80% of solid waste in foodservice comes from packaging including customer waste
like napkins, straws, and food packaging. Thirty to forty percent of waste comes from food production and
preparation. Procurement produces a large amount of cardboard, as nearly every product arriving in
inventory is in a cardboard carton — however, cardboard is recyclable.

17. Which of the following examples would be classified as a sustainability effort?
a. Careful menu planning and use of standardized recipes
b. Switching to from plastic to compostable plates and utensils for customer service
c. Purchasing in-season produce
d. All of the above

Answer: D. Careful menu planning and use of standardized recipes can improve inventory management
and reduce food waste, which addresses the waste management principle of foodservice sustainability.
Answer choices B and C are examples of sustainable design and purchasing in-season.

Food Service Logistics 68
© 2022 Veritense™

References

1 Gregoire MB, Spears MC. Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach. 9th ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson; 2016.

2 National Restaurant Association Education Foundation. ServSafe Coursebook. 6th ed. Chicago: NRA;
2012:7-3.

3 Martin J, Oakley C. Managing Child Nutrition Programs — Leadership For Excellence. 2nd ed.
Gaithersburg, MD: Jones & Bartlett; 2008:643.

Food Service Logistics 69
