MANAGEMENT CONCEPTS

FOR THE REGISTERED DIETITIAN NUTRITIONIST EXAMINATION

a VERITENSE™ product

WRITTEN BY
Bailey DeBarmore, PhD MHS RDN LDN

Creator of the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™

Version: Oct 1, 2022
© 2022 Veritense™

Table of Contents

a= 0 EEE ETE EEEESEOCESTS SOOO EOOSESCE ECTS SSOOSEOOOSSOCO SOLS SSCESESSCOSESSCSCESESSOOSESCOSESOSECESESOCOSECSOSSSESSCESESECESESSTSCESESSCTTESSCCSESSESETESTSTISTSTIOIEN 3
Management Overview. ..........::cccccccececeeececeneeeceeeeececeaeeecaaeeeceaeeeseeeaeeecaaeeecaeeesecaaeeesaaeeeseeeeeecaaeeeceaeeeseeeeeseceaeeesceeeseeseeeesgeeeseneeeseeaes 3
The 5 Management Functions .......... ccc ceececeee ee ceee eect ee ee eee ne ee ee ee enna eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee ee ceases eae ae ae eee eeeaaeaees 4
Study Guide QUESTIONS... ..e ce ecceeseceseeeeeeeseeeeneeceeeeeeeecaaecaeeeeeeseeecaaecaeeeeeeecaeecaeseeeeeseeecaaeceaeeseeeesaeecaeeeeeeesseesaeeneeseeeesneeeneeenees 10
Study Guide Questions (ANSWEYIS) ..........cccceceeseeceeeeeeeeeeneeceaeeeeeeeseeecaaecaeeeeeeecaeecaeseeeeesaeesaaeceaeeeeeeesaeecnaeeeeeeesaeesaeseaeeseneeseeeneesaees 11
The Healthcare SyStem ..........cccccccccceeeceeeeeeeeeeeecaeeecaeeeseeeaeeecaaeeecaaeeeseeeaececeaeeeceaeeeseeeaesecaaeeesaaeeeseeeaeeecaaeeesaeeeseeseeeesaeeesseeseeeeaees 12
Labor Unions and Labor Legislation «0.0.0.2... ...eccceeeeece cece eeee ee ee ee eee ne eee eee eee ee eee eae eee eee ee ee ee eee dee eee cae ae eee ee ce caaeaeee ee eeeaeaees 14
Mintzberg Management Roles ..............:e cece e teeter ee eee eee eee ee eee eee eee eee eee 20
LEACEFSNID 00... eee cece ee ee EEE Eee eee eee eae eee eee eee eens 21
DeCiSION MAkiNG.........0:.ccccceceeee ee eect eee ne eee eee eee eee eee ee eee eee aes ees 27
Management Concepts & Terms .........:cecceeeseesseceeeeeeeeecneecnaeeeeeeeeaeesaaecaeeeeeeesaeecaaeeeeeeesaeecaaeceaeeseeeesaeecnaeeeeeeesaeesaeseaeeseneeeneeeneenees 28
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs .....0..... cece eee eee ene eee ee eee eee eee eee eee eee 32
Management Theories. ...........ceceeceeeec eee eet eee eee Ee eee eee eee eee eae eee eee 34
Organizational StrUCtures ...........ccccccececeeceecceeeceeeeeceeeeceeeeeeeceaeeeee ease senses eeceaeeeseaeeeseeeeeeeceaeeeseaeeeseeeeeseceaeeeseeeeseeeeeeescaeessneeeeeeeeeeees 35
Study Guide QuEeSTIONS.....0...c. cece cececeseeeeeeeeeeeeneeceeeeeeeeeeaeecaaeeeeeesaeecaaecaeeeeeeesseecaeseeeeesaeecaaeceaeeseeeesaeesaeeeeeeeeaeesaeeneeseneesneeeneeeees 37
Study Guide Questions (ANSWEYIS) ..........cccceceeseeceeeeeeeeeeneeceaeeeeeeeseeecaaecaeeeeeeecaeecaeseeeeesaeesaaeceaeeeeeeesaeecnaeeeeeeesaeesaeseaeeseneeseeeneesaees 39
Practice Questions (Part 1)........ccccccccccccseececeeeeeceeeae cece aeeeceeeeceeeaeeecaaeeeseaeeesecsaeeecaaeeeseeeeeeceaeeesaeeeseeeeeseceaeeeseaeeeseeseeeecgeeeseeeeeeneaas 4
Practice Questions (Part 1) (AMSWEIS) ..........ccccccccccececeeeeeceeeeeeeeeaeeecaaeeeceeeeseceaeeecaaeeeceeeeeeeceaeeesaaeeeseeeeeseceaeeesaeeeseeseeeeccaeeeseeeeeeneaes 44

Part 2... cececceeceeeeeseeeeceaecseeceeeeecaecaeeceeeeeceaecsaeceeeeeeeaessaecaeeesaesseeceeseesaecsaeseeseeeaecaaecaeseeseaesaeecaeseeseaesaaeseeeeeseaeseesaeseeseaeseeeseseeseaesnaeeaes 48
SYSTEMS TNEOSY 00... eececeseceeeceeeeecneeceaeeeeeeecaeeeaaeceaeeeeeeecaaecaaeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeaeeeeeeecaeecaeeeeeeesieecsaeseeeseeeecaeecsaeeeeeeeseeesaeseeeseneesneeeneeeaees 48
Study Guide QUESTIONS... ..c ce ecccececeteeeeeeeeeeeeneeceeeeeeeeecaaecaaeeeeeesaeecaaecaeeeeeeeeaeecaaeeeeeeesaeesaaeceaeeseeeecaeesaeeeeeeesaeesaesneeseneesneeenaeesees 54

Study Guide Questions (Answers)

Strategic PANNING ..........c:ccccccccecceeeceeeeececeeeee cece aeeeeeaeeeceeeeeeeceaeeeeaaeeeceeeaeeeceaeeesaaeeeseeeeeseceaeeecaaeeeseeeaeseceaeeesaeeeseeeeeeecaeeeegeeeseeeeeeseee
Marketing ......... cece eee Ee ee eee eee eee eae eee eee 58
Cultural Competence & HUMIlity ......... cc. cece cece ceeeeeeeceee cece cae eeeeaeeeeeeeae seca ease ceaeeeseeeeeeeceaeeeseaeeeseeeaeseceaeeesaeeeseeeeeeeecaeeeseeeeeeeeteeees 62
Practice Questions (Part 2)........cccccccccccccseececeeeeeceeeaeeeceaeeeceaeeeceeeaeeecaaeeeceeeeeseesaeeecaaeeeseeeeeeceaeeesaeeeseeeeeseseaeeeseeeesseseeeecgeeesseeeeeneaas 72
Practice Questions (Part 2) (AMSWEIS) ..........ccccccccccececeneeeeeeeeeceesaeeecaaeeeceeeeeeeaaeeecaaeeeceeeeeeeceaeeesaaeeeseeeeeseceaeeesaeeeseesaeeeegeeeseeeeeeeeaas 74
Palt 3... EE ee eee eee eae eee 77
Performance Improvement MOdels............:::ccccecceeee cece eee ne ee ee erence ae ee erence ne ee ee eee ae eee ee eee e deed ee eee eee eee cae ae ee esses caaeaeeeeeeenaeaees 77
Project Management Tools ........... ccc ccee cee e cece erent ee eene ee ceeeaeee eae eeceeeeeseeeaeeeeaaeeeseeeeeseegeeessaeeeseeeeeeeesaeeesseeeeseeieessgeeessneeeeneaas 85
Practice Questions (Part 3)....... cee ceecessceesseceeeeeeeeecneecnaeeeeeeeeaeecaaeceaeeeeeeeeaeecaeeeeeeeeaeeeaaeseaeeseeeesaeesaeeeeeeeeeeesaeseaeeseeeeseeenaeenieeeeneees 91
Practice Questions (Part 3) (ANSWETS) .........eecceccecsseceeeceeeeeseeeeaaeceaeeeeeeecaeecaaeseeeeeeaeeeaaeseaeeeeeeesaaecaeseeeeeeeeesaeseaeeseeeeseeenaeenneeeeneess 92
U2) <1 8 |< 1> SEEDS ESE E SESE ESO SESSSESOO SOOO OSES SSEOSOOSEOOSEOSESOSOOOSOS 94

Terms of use: Bailey DeBarmore is the creator and sole owner of the exclusive copyright to this study resource. This
publication may not be shared physically or electronically with anyone, manipulated, copied, reprinted and sold,
altered, or reproduced in any form or by any means without requesting further permission from the owner, Bailey
DeBarmore. This book is for personal use only by a single individual. It should not be distributed to a dietetic
internship class or otherwise used for academic purposes without discussing terms of use with the owner. By
purchasing this item, you agree to the Terms of Use outlined herein. To inquire about further permissions for this
document, including access for groups such as dietetic internship classes or graduate courses, contact the owner to
learn about your options.

Management Concepts 2
© 2022 Veritense™

Part 1

Management Overview

For the management section of the RD exam, don’t be overwhelmed by the terms. Step one of
being ready for this part of the test is being familiar with these terms and their definitions. Note
that | didn’t say “knowing the definitions”, | said “be familiar with”. You don’t need to be able to
write an essay about systems theory, but you should be able to recognize a definition referring
to inputs, transformation, and outputs, as a key part of systems theory. Before we jump into the
5 Management Functions, let’s do an overview. This overview isn’t something to skim over —
many of these overview ideas are tested on the exam. Plus, this overview provides context.

First, it's important to understand that systems theory and systems approach, functional
organization, and management functions have similar concepts, but are not directly connected.
They are distinct theories that are used together in practice.

The systems approach uses functional subsystems and the transformation of inputs to outputs.
While the management functions are related to the systems approach, they are not directly
involved in transformation and they are not linking processes between communications and
decision making.

The ideas are separate but similar.

Systems Approach and Functional Management Functions
Organization
e Functional subsystems e Planning, organization, staffing, directing,
e Linking processes controlling
e Inputs, outputs, and transformation e Used to coordinate subsystems

Procurement, production, distribution and service, sanitation, and maintenance are the
functional subsystems within the foodservice system, each classified by function. Come back
to this overview when we talk about functional organization and systems approach in Part Il.
Don’t worry, | put a reminder in Part II for you.

The 5 management functions are planning, organization, staffing, directing, and controlling."
Planning and other management functions set plans and objectives, but they don’t outline
exactly how the objectives should be achieved. Furthermore, the 5 management functions don’t
change between departments or between subsystems. Managers in each department apply the
same 5 management functions — meaning that the 5 management functions are pervasive.
As you go through the details of each management function, build a framework in your mind on
which to organize and remember the different definitions. Instead of just brute-force memorizing
terms and definitions on flashcards, having context around the terms will help distinguish similar
terms and definitions from one another.

Summarize the previous paragraph.

Management Concepts 3

© 2022 Veritense™

The 3 skills you need to be a successful manager are:'
1. Technical — knowledge and capabilities to perform specific

tasks There are 3 types of

2. Human/Interpersonal — soft skills that should be nurtured, resources core to all
such as communication and attention to relationships (in management principles.?
contrast to hard skills that can be learned) e Human resources

3. Conceptual — ability to integrate activities and interests of e Physical resources

an organization — the most important skill to have at higher e Financial resources
levels of management

Write out and define each of the 3 skills necessary to be a successful manager. Which is the
most important at higher levels of management?

What 3 types of resources are central to all management principles?

The 5 Management Functions

To begin, review the 5 management functions in this section. For applied management
questions on the exam, like situational questions, you'll need to be able to identify examples of
each function. Keeping this framework in mind will also help you learn the other concepts.

Management is the integration and coordination of resources to achieve the desired objectives
of the organization. There are numerous functions, processes, methods, and theories on how to
“do management”.

The 5 management functions are used to coordinate subsystems in order to achieve objectives.
Managing subsystems through the 5 functions is expected to result in the achievement of
objectives. '

Planning — using problem solving and decision making to ensure proper utilization of all
resources

Organization — assigning duties; delegating authority; creating responsibility

Staffing- recruiting and screening potential employees; hiring, orienting, and training new
employees; supervising and evaluating employees

Directing — using leadership and management styles; using motivation and communication

Controlling — establishing standards for performance; evaluating actual performance;
implementing corrective action

Can you think of a mnemonic to remember the 5 functions?
POSDC

Take out a few sheets of paper and label each one with the name of one of the 5 management
functions. As you read through the next sections, write down what you think is important to know
about each one.

Management Concepts 4

© 2022 Veritense™

The 5 Management Functions

* The primary function of * Organizing activities, * Recruiting and Managers instruct, * Measure performance
management. All other assigning authority and screening potential guide, and oversee the and take corrective
functions are responsibility, delegating employees performance of action to ensure
performance within the workers to achieve accomplishment of an
framework of plans laid + Prioritize time and * Hiring, orienting, and goals organizational goal
out. personnel resources training new

employees * Provides importance to ° Ensures effective and

* Planning is continuous, + Important because leads to planning, organization, efficient utilization of
designed for efficiency, well-defined jobs, clear * Supervising and and staffing organizational
occurs through all level lines of authority, evaluating employees resources
of management, and coordination of roles, « Where the work
flexible. specialization of jobs, actually starts to get

effective administration, done

growth and diversification,

and scope for new ¢ Involves the

changes human/interpersonal
component of
management

Management Concepts 5
© 2022 Veritense™

Planning

The planning function of management involves looking ahead and preparing for the other
management roles. Managers need to see the organization as it could be, not as it is. Planning
is the primary function of management and the most basic. It involves formulating plans that
balance needs and demands with the available resources (financial, physical, human).

Planning includes: As a function, planning is:
e Planning by objective e Goal oriented

e Facilitating coordination and controlling e Acontinuous process
e = Minimizing uncertainty e Pervasive

Planning occurs at all levels of management and in all departments.

One key resource important in planning is human resources planning which ensures that an
organization’s (or department’s) labor requirements are met.' Human resources planning
includes forecasting staffing needs (FTEs) and analyzing labor market conditions.

Organization

Organization is the management function of grouping activities, delegating authority, and
coordinating relationships (both horizontally and vertically). '

Organization includes:

e Identifying activities to complete and to be delegated, and grouping them

e Assigning responsibility for effective management — everyone should know who they are
accountable to and what authority they have

e Successful planning and organization to avoid duplication of efforts which is a waste of
resources (e.g. time, money, staff)

Organization is also key to maintain a safe work environment which is important to:

e Reduce use of workman’s compensation, resulting in decreased costs
e Reduce lost workdays, resulting in decreased costs
e Demonstrate care for employees

Staffing

Staffing includes recruiting, screening, and selecting potential employees; hiring, orienting, and
training new employees, and supervising and evaluating current employees. '
© 2022 Veritense™

Hiring

What is the difference between recruitment and selection? '
Recruitment is locating and encouraging potential applicants to apply for a job opening.

Selection is comparing applicant knowledge, skills, and abilities to those required of a position
and choosing the most qualified applicant.

In hiring, the manager is responsible for writing job descriptions and job specifications. No
matter the level of the job, a job description and specification must be written.

What is the difference between a job description and job specification?"

A job description includes job title, tasks, duties, roles, and responsibilities for a certain job — in
sum, what the candidate can expect to do if they get the job.

A job specification includes the desired qualifications, skills, and abilities needed to complete
the job — in sum, the job specification characterizes the ideal candidate.

On the day a new employee is hired, they should be given performance objectives.

Employee Training

The manager is also responsible for making sure there is a planned new employee
orientation and training program in place.' Using a standardized program for all new hires
means that all employees will be familiar with policies, procedures, job tasks, expectations, and
other important aspects of the job. It also reduces the chance of miscommunication, like an
employee saying they didn’t know they needed to do something.

Managers should also have planned development, which is the process of improving the
technical, human, and conceptual skills of employees. ' An example would be attendance at
webinars, lunch and learns, or in-service trainings.

In foodservice, managers should have planned in-service trainings that utilize the principles of
adult learning and effective task teaching. To decide on an in-service training topic, a manager
should observe staff and their work area to determine what topics need to be addressed, such
as things to improve, things to work on, and things that may need to be explained more
thoroughly.

How should a manager decide on an in-service training topic?

Choose from the job specifications
Observe staff and their work area
Ask a manager in another department
Find ideas online

aoop

© 2022 Veritense™

Employee Performance

Personnel policies should reflect the current realities of the specific work place. Policies should
be kept up-to-date, and should be reinforced by strong supervision to make sure employees are
being treated fairly and expectations are consistent.*

If an employee finds job tasks too demanding, how could you, as a manager, address the
situation? You should help the employee improve their performance by empowering them and
motivating them to do well.’ Specifically, you can simplify their tasks, lessen their workload, and
reduce time pressure, while maintaining a positive attitude and constructive conversation. You
wouldn't re-design a job description to match their needs and to keep them in their current
position. Having a conversation that re-iterates the performance standards for their job
description also wouldn't be effective — it wouldn’t actually reduce the job demands they feel or
improve their performance. Providing additional resources, like staff assistance, modified
equipment, and raw materials don’t empower the employees.

Write out the scenario from the paragraph above and the options to address it. Explain why
each possible option is ideal or not.

Employee Discipline

Consistency is key when disciplining employees — an employee should feel like they are
getting the same treatment that any other employee would for the same offense. '

Identifying solutions to correct undesirable behaviors, providing feedback on performance, and
identifying causes for unacceptable behavior are all processes involved in employee discipline
specific to improving outcomes, but the most important, overarching idea is consistency.

What are 3 processes key to improving outcomes via employee discipline?

Progressive discipline is a graduated range of responses to employee performance problems
or conduct problems. ' The idea is that disciplinary responses should be appropriate to the
problem. Employees should know what to expect, and employers are held to fair, consistent,
and objective standards for discipline and proper documentation of both actions and decisions.

You may get questions on the RD exam that ask which response is most appropriate for a given
situation. First consider what the problem in the scenario is — is itan employee’s work quality?
tardiness? poor conduct? Then, evaluate each answer choice in terms of addressing the issue,
appropriateness of the response, and formal documentation. Someone being tardy for the first
time, for example, doesn’t warrant reporting that employee to the manager’s manager.

Progressive discipline (escalation) includes these 4 steps for formal documentation: 1) verbal
warning, 2) written warning, 3) suspension, 4) termination. The verbal warning itself would be
documented, and if there are situations leading up to the verbal warning, those can be
documented as well. For example, a manager might document unkempt employee appearance,
poor availability when on call, or inappropriate conduct. These all serve as rationale for

© 2022 Veritense™

discipline. Note that informal conversations, like work-related advice from a supervisor, don’t
require documentation, especially documentation related to discipline or the employees “file”. '

Directing

Directing involves the actual action steps taken from planning, organization, and staffing.
Organizing determines which tasks should be delegated while directing actually delegates the
tasks. Key skills for directing are soft skills (interpersonal skills).2 Problem solving and
communication are particularly important in directing.

Have you heard of “emotional intelligence”? Emotional intelligence includes a few skills,
including emotional awareness, emotional self-regulation, communication, and
empathy. * Emotional awareness is the ability to identify and name your own emotions.
Emotional regulation is the ability to manage your own emotions when necessary and helping
others to do so.

Controlling

Controlling ensures there is effective and efficient utilization of organizational resources in order
to achieve the planned goals.' Controlling serves two basic purposes: facilitating coordination
and help in planning

Controlling has 5 characteristics.

e Anend function — comes into play when performances are made with plans

e Pervasive — includes all managers, all levels, all types of concerns

e Forward looking — look to the past for effective control in the future

e Dynamic — continuous review, making changes wherever possible

e Related to planning — without planning, controlling is meaningless and without controlling,
planning is useless

What are the 4 steps in controlling?

—

Establish standards (targets to achieve)

)
2) Measure performance
3) Compare actual and standard performance — identify causes and extent of deviation
4) Take remedial actions — take corrective measures for deviations and possibly revising

targets. A manager can only exercise control by taking corrective measures
As a manager, quality improvement steps would occur during planning and controlling.

Note that while the functions may occur in a certain order, they are not necessarily stepwise. A
manager might do several functions within one day, one week, or in one project.

Write out the 5 characteristics of controlling and the 4 steps in controlling.

© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your first pass at
applying the knowledge you’ve read and practiced in example calculations in a question-and-answer
format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your notes.

1.

Are the main management functions the same from department to department? In
nursing and foodservice? In accounting and medical?

Do the management functions help you create an approach on how objectives are
achieved?

What management skill is the most important at higher levels of management?

Contrast hard skills and soft skills. If you are hiring a candidate, would you rather have
someone with technical expertise but poor communication, or good soft skills who needs
to learn the “tricks of the trade”?

What is human resources planning?

Delegation is a key part of which management function?

When should a new employee be given their performance objectives?

Why should there be a standardized new employee training that all employees go
through?

In what management function or functions would quality improvement activities occur?

10
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions (Answers)

1.

Are the main management functions the same from department to department? In
nursing and foodservice? In accounting and medical?
e Yes, management functions are pervasive.

Do the management functions help you create an approach on how objectives are
achieved?
e No, they help set plans and objectives, but they don’t outline how objectives will
be achieved.

What management skill is the most important at higher levels of management?
e Conceptual skills are the most important at higher levels of management.

Contrast hard skills and soft skills. If you are hiring a candidate, would you rather have
someone with technical expertise but poor communication, or good soft skills who needs
to learn the “tricks of the trade”?

e Employers often prefer to hire candidates with exemplar soft skills because they
are typically good workers, team players, and able to learn the technical skills
they lack. In contrast, a candidate with exemplar technical skills but poor
communication, inability to work in a team, or poor work ethic would be difficult to
work with and that difficulty would outweigh the benefit of them knowing the hard
skills. Obviously, the ideal candidate has both soft and hard skills.

What is human resources planning?

e Akey part of the planning management function, human resources planning
includes forecasting staffing needs and analyzing labor market conditions to
ensure that your department or organization has adequate labor requirements
met.

Delegation is a key part of what management function?
e Organization.

When should a new employee be given their performance objectives?
e On the day they are hired.

Why should there be a standardized new employee training that all employees go
through?

e A standardized program means all employees are familiar with their expectations
and reduces the chance of miscommunication. Standardized new employee
training and reinforced personnel policies serve the same function. Both are
important.

In what management function or functions would quality improvement activities occur?
e Planning and controlling.

11
© 2022 Veritense™

The Healthcare System
Accreditation Organizations

Hospital accrediting agencies must acquire “deeming status” from the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) per the Social Security Act. Accreditation is “a process by which an
impartial organization reviews a company’s operation to ensure the company conducts business
in a manner consistent with national standards.”° CMS does not require accreditation for
healthcare delivery professionals to receive Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement.® Some
states may have regulatory requirements that may require accreditation. Some accreditation
agencies serve health insurance companies, some serve human and health organizations, and
others serve healthcare delivery organizations, including hospitals. This section will focus on
accreditation agencies for the last category.

The Joint Commission (TJC) was established in 1951 and is an independent, not-for-profit
organization that accredits and certifies hospitals, home care organizations, rehabilitation
center, long term and nursing facilities, behavioral health organizations, addiction treatment and
recovery programs, ambulatory care providers, as well as clinical laboratories.’ TJC has had
deeming authority since 1966. The governing board is made up of healthcare practitioners,
public health professionals, and public representatives. The TJC accreditation standards are
developed according to National Patient Safety Goals and input from stakeholders and exceed
the standards of the CMS Conditions of Participation (CoPs). The TJC accreditation survey
process is patient-centered and focused on the healthcare delivery process on-site surveys are
conducted every 3 years with annual self-assessments prepared by hospitals.

DNVGL Healthcare, Inc. is a corporation and has had deeming authority for hospitals in the US
since 2008. Their accreditation requirements relate directly to the CMS CoPs with a focus on
continuous improvement processes and implementing CMS quality initiatives. DNVGLHC
conducts annual surveys to validate Medicare compliance. DNVGLCHC is led and managed by
healthcare operational experts, including leaders in healthcare management, clinical services,
health law, ISO certification, and engineering.

The National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) is a non-profit established in 1990 to
improve healthcare through evidence-based methods and identifying organizations that are run
in ways which improve care. They accredit health plans and Patient-Centered Medical Homes
and have moved to measuring the quality of medical providers using their Healthcare
Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS) which includes data on 60% of the US
population and provides data for accountability and benchmarking.®

CMS has a role in certifying hospitals, meaning that they meet federal regulatory standards and
thus are eligible for reimbursement from federally funded programs (e.g. Medicare). If a hospital
is accredited by an organization with deeming authority, it is also certified by CMS, because it

has met or exceeded CMS standards. However, an organization does not need to be accredited
to be CMS-certified. CMS conducts investigations and surveys (through state agency partners),
including random validation surveys of accredited hospitals, to ensure compliance and eligibility.
Why would an organization pay a fee to be accredited when they could be certified for free by a

12
© 2022 Veritense™

state agency on behalf of CMS? The answer: time is money. The organization would have to
wait for an unannounced Medicare certification survey, and during that time, they are ineligible
for Medicare reimbursement. Alternatively, they can pay an accreditation agency with deeming
authority from CMS, and receive eligibility sooner.°

Value-based Healthcare

Volume-based care (or fee-for-service care) is a payment model where provider
reimbursements are tied to the quantity of services and procedures. This model incentivizes
health systems to provide more treatments to more patients rather than providing patients with
only the care they need or by focusing on high-quality treatment.

In 2007, there was renewed interest and dedication in moving towards value-based care, with
an initial focus on Patient-Centered Medical Homes, which center on team healthcare
approaches in primary care organization and delivery.'°"

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) created a new division in CMS — the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Innovation (CMMI) — which was created to develop and test Alternative Payment
Models (APMs). APMs are “alternative” to traditional fee-for-service care.

One of the first APMs was accountable care organizations (ACOs), which are groups of
healthcare professionals and/or hospitals who voluntarily come together to coordinate high-
quality care to Medicare patients. Their goal is to prevent medical errors and avoid unnecessary
health care duplication. Provider reimbursements are tied to quality metrics and reduced costs
of care.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, medical providers using APMs were better able to manage
financial volatility compared to those using traditional FFS payment models."

As of 2016, the CMMI had explored 10 APMs that help advance the healthcare system from
traditional fee-for-service care towards value-based care by tying 30% of traditional Medicare
payments to quality or to value. '2

Examples include the Medicare Shared Savings Program (MSSP) created by the ACA, Next
Generation ACOs for ACOs experienced in population health coordination, the Comprehensive
ESRD Care Model which creates ACOs that include dialysis facilities, nephrologist, and other
providers and suppliers to coordinate care with accountability, Bundled Payments for Care
Improvement which targets 48 conditions within a single payment for care episodes, among
others.

Credentialing and Licensure

Some states in the US have licensure laws for dietitians, meaning that to practice in that state,
an RD needs to be issued a license by the appropriate state agency. These statues include a
title protection provision which prevents unlicensed individuals from presenting themselves to
the public as a dietitian.

13
© 2022 Veritense™

Labor Unions and Labor Legislation

What is a labor union? A labor union “is an organization of workers joined to protect their
common interests and improve their working conditions...[and serve] as an intermediary
between the employer and employees.”'? Labor unions in the US are legally sanctioned and
formally organized. National and international labor unions often have union “locals” at the state
level or smaller geographical level with charters from the larger national or international
organization. Locals may be based on geography or company employment and are typically
numbered. Locals have governing bodies, including an executive board, that communicate and
uphold the interests of the larger union. Unions are run by paid staff, with their salary provided
for by union dues. Union dues are also used for legal costs, negotiation costs, arbitrators’ fees,
strike funds, and political activity.

What is the purpose of alabor union? The primary purpose of labor unions is to give workers
the power to negotiate for favorable hours, wages, and working conditions through collective
bargaining.

e Collective bargaining occurs when representatives from the employer (typically
employees from the Human Resources Department) and representatives from the union
meet to negotiate about employment conditions, wages, and hours." It is called
collective bargaining because the union representatives are bargaining on behalf of the
union members. This situation is in contrast, for example, to a dietitian negotiating with
their supervisor about a promotion for only themselves.

e Collective bargaining results in a collective bargaining agreement (CBA) that outlines
the terms of employment for employees that are a member of that labor union/bargaining
unit.'* The CBA is enforced and monitored by the union, with complaints registered and
addressed through established grievance procedures and arbitration. Management
cannot change working conditions without negotiating with union representatives. '°

o At-will employment means that an employer can fire you or adjust your working
conditions at nearly any time for nearly any reason. '* At-will employment is in
contrast to positions where an employer must provide just cause (as defined by
the CBA) for termination or discipline. '°

What laws govern labor unions?

e The National Labor Relations Act (NLRA, also called the Wagner Act) was passed in
1935 and guarantees rights of private sector employees to organize and join labor/trade
unions, engage in collective bargaining, select their representation, and to strike if
necessary. The NLRA protects an employee’s right to join a union as well as their right
to not join a union. The act also created the National Labor Relations Board which
monitor the relationship between employees, unions, and employers and enforce the
NLRA. This federal act permits states to pass ‘right to work’ laws (also called ‘open shop
laws’). State laws govern public sector unions. This act is pro-labor.

o You should be familiar with the terms closed shop, open shop, agency shop, and
union shop (next page).

14
© 2022 Veritense™

o Under the NLRA, employers can express a preference that employees not
unionize but employers cannot say that employees cannot unionize.

o Under the NLRA, unions must provide “duty of fair representation” and protect
employee rights as outlined in the union contract.

o The act was extended in 1974 to include employees of private nonprofit hospitals
and nursing homes"® with amendments that unions representing workers in these
industries provide 90 days’ notice before terminating labor agreements and that
labor disputes in these industries must be submitted to mediation by a federal or
similar agency to avoid strikes that would affect essential services. '®

The Taft-Hartley Act (Labor Management Relations Act) was passed in 1947 and
added a list of “unfair labor practices” on the part of unions to the NLRA. This act
outlawed closed shops and permitted union shops in certain scenarios." It also allows
for the US president to stop national strikes for up to 80 days. This act addressed issues
like restraining employee rights, discriminating against employees due to union
membership, refusing to bargain in good faith, encouraging striking to force union
matters, and charging excessive union fees. This act is pro-management.

Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (also called the Landrum-Griffin
Act) was passed in 1959 and, like the Taft-Hartley Act, also amended the NLRA. It was
passed to regulate the internal affairs of labor unions by imposing a code of conduct in
response to corruption, racketeering, and other misconduct common in unions during the
1950s.'8 For example, it protected union members from unions misusing dues and
pension funds.

Write out the name of the previously discussed 3 labor union laws in the order in which they
were passed. Think of ways to remember what each act was about. What was the purpose of
each act? Which were considered pro-labor and which were considered pro-management?

Terms to know

A bargaining unit is a group of employees with clear and identifiable common interests.
A union may be made up of a single bargaining unit or a union may be made up of
several bargaining units. A single labor union must represent the bargaining unit,
meaning that a single bargaining unit cannot be split between different unions. Some job
positions may be classified as ‘bargaining unit positions’ meaning that the job is
represented by a labor union and that union negotiates the conditions of that job. If you
apply and are chosen for that position, you would not need to join the union. Conversely,
however, if you want to join a union, you must be in a recognized bargaining unit.'®

Closed shops refer to situations where only union members can be hired for positions
covered by a bargaining unit. Closed shops were outlawed in 1947 by the Taft-Hartley
Act.'8

Union shops refer to situations where an employee doesn’t need to be a union member
to be hired but must join the union within a certain time period after beginning work. '
Union shops are illegal in some states

15
© 2022 Veritense™

e Agency shops refer to situations where you do not need to be a union member to hold
a bargaining unit position but you have to pay partial union dues and fees. '* The money
you pay only covers union activities that you benefit from, such as collective bargaining
and grievance adjustments, but not political activity or union organization.

[e)

Grievance adjustment refers to the right of employees to present grievances to
their employer and have conditions adjusted as long as those adjustments are
not in conflict with the collective bargaining agreement.”°

e Open shops are situations where no one can be compelled to join (or not join) a union
or to pay dues but still is considered part of the bargaining unit and benefits from union
activities on behalf of that bargaining unit. '* Open shops are typically in “right to work”
states which is named as such because any employee has the “right to work” regardless
of union membership.

e Arbitration is a third-party intervention where the appointed arbitrator has the power to
dictate settlement terms, guaranteeing solutions. Mediation stands in contrast to
arbitration where mediators have no power to dictate a final ruling.

Other labor-related legislation

e The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), originally passed in 1938, established a Federal
minimum wage, overtime pay eligibility, and child labor standards affecting both full-time
and part-time workers in private and public sector positions.*’ This Act has been
amended several times in order to raise the Federal minimum wage and extend/repeal
protections to certain employee groups. The Act established recordkeeping regulations
requiring employers to keep records of wages and hours worked. 7!

[e)

The Equal Pay Act of 1963 amended the FLSA to make it illegal to pay workers
lower wages strictly on the basis of sex.

The 1967 Age Discrimination in Employment Act prohibited employee
discrimination against persons 40 years of age or older.

The 1983 Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act provided pay,
and working condition protection for migrant and seasonal farm workers.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act amended a section of the FLSA
to require employers to provide a reasonable break time for nursing mothers.?'

e The Civil Rights Act of 1964 ended segregation of public places and under Title VII,
prohibits employment and union discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex,
and national origin.” It also created the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
which can file lawsuits on behalf of aggrieved employees.

[e)

[e)

The Civil Rights Act was instrumental in paving the way for the Voting Rights Act
of 1965 and the Fair Housing Act of 1968.

Title VII Equal Employment Act has been supplemented by additional acts to
extend protection from discrimination to pregnancy (1978), age (1967), and
disabilities (1990)

16
Table 1. Employer strategies and union strategies

© 2022 Veritense™

Employer Strategies

Union Strategies

Lockout: management prevents union
employees from entering. Rarely used due to
risk of negative publicity

Sell and close: threat of job loss from the
company being sold used to force compromise

Strikebreakers: non-union workers brought in

Strike: employees do not go to work in order to
protest working conditions, wages, etc. Often
combined with picketing.

Picket: employees publicly air complaints via
demonstration outside employer building

Boycott: refusal to do business with a party or

an employer and union where the employer
agrees to stop doing business with another
employer@4

Refusal to participate in collective bargaining

&, | until striking employees come to terms, called provide services until demands are met
& | ‘scabs’
Collective bargaining
Management-run operations: administrative
personnel perform the jobs typically done by
union members when they are striking
Supervisors can communicate to employees a
preference that they do not unionize?
Blacklist: circulate list of union members in Featherbedding: attempting to have employers
order to discriminate against them pay for work that is not performed
Yellow-dog contract: having employees sign an | Hot cargo agreement (see lefthand cell)
agreement that they will not join a union
ot Collective work stoppage at health care
® | Hot cargo agreement: arrangement between institutions without providing required notice**

Refusal to participate in collective bargaining

17
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your first pass at
applying the knowledge you’ve read and practiced in example calculations in a question-and-answer
format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your notes.

Q1. The following are term definitions. Write the number on a scrap piece of paper and then the
correct term.

1.
2.

10.

A situation where only union members can be hired for a particular job.

A group of employees with common interests that are clear and identifiable, such as performing
the same job duties.

A situation where an employee does not need to be part of a union to hold that job, but may need
to pay dues and fees to a union.

An intervention where the appointed third party has the power to dictate settlement terms.

An organization of workers joined to protect common interests and improve working conditions.
An intervention where the appointed third party does not have the power to dictate settlement
terms.

A labor strategy that utilizes the unity and size of the bargaining unit to achieve better working
conditions for employees.

A situation where a non-union employee can fill a position but must join the union within 30 days
of being hired.

A contract that outlines terms of employment for bargaining unit members and reflects the
agreement between the management representatives and union representatives.

A situation where all employees are considered part of the bargaining unit regardless of union
membership.

Q2. The statements below correspond to which pieces of legislation? Write out the numbers
below with your answer on a scrap piece of paper.

ONOaARWN>

Also called the Wagner Act

Also called the Taft-Hartley Act

Also called the Landrum-Griffin Act

Ended segregation in public places

Created the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission

Made it illegal to pay workers different wages on the basis of sex
Prevents unions from charging excessive union fees

Created the National Labor Relations Board

Permits states to govern public sector unions

. Provides employees with the right to join or not to join unions
. Made “closed shops’ illegal

. Prevents unions from misusing union fees

. Imposed a code of conduct upon labor unions

. Outlawed child labor

. Established a Federal minimum wage

. Requires that unions provide duty of fair representation

18
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions (Answers)

Q1. The following are term definitions. Write the correct term next to the definition.

Q2.

1.
2.

10.

A situation where only union members can be hired for a particular job. - Closed shop

A group of employees with common interests that are clear and identifiable, such as performing
the same job duties. — Bargaining unit

A situation where an employee does not need to be part of a union to hold that job, but may need
to pay dues and fees to a union. — Agency shop

An intervention where the appointed third party has the power to dictate settlement terms. —
Arbitration

An organization of workers joined to protect common interests and improve working conditions. —
Labor union

An intervention where the appointed third party does not have the power to dictate settlement
terms. — Mediation

A labor strategy that utilizes the unity and size of the bargaining unit to achieve better working
conditions for employees. — Collective bargaining

A situation where a non-union employee can fill a position but must join the union within 30 days
of being hired. — Union shop

A contract that outlines terms of employment for bargaining unit members and reflects the
agreement between the management representatives and union representatives. — Collective
bargaining agreement

A situation where all employees are considered part of the bargaining unit regardless of union
membership. — Open shop

The statements below correspond to which pieces of legislation?

oaRwWN>

= 9 ON

11.
12.

13.

14.
15.
16.

0.

Also called the Wagner Act — National Labor Relations Act of 1935

Also called the Taft-Hartley Act - Labor Management Relations Act of 1947

Also called the Landrum-Griffin Act - Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959
Ended segregation in public places — Civil Rights Act of 1964

Created the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission — Civil Rights Act of 1964

Made it illegal to pay workers different wages on the basis of sex — Equal Pay Act of 1963,
amended the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938

Prevents unions from charging excessive union fees — Labor Management Relations Act of 1947
Created the National Labor Relations Board — National Labor Relations Act of 1935
Permits states to govern public sector unions — National Labor Relations Act of 1935

Provides employees with the right to join or not to join unions— National Labor Relations Act of
1935

Made “closed shops” illegal- Labor Management Relations Act of 1947

Prevents unions from misusing union fees — Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of
1959

Imposed a code of conduct upon labor unions — Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure
Act of 1959

Outlawed child labor — Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938
Established a Federal minimum wage — Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938
Requires that unions provide duty of fair representation— National Labor Relations Act of 1935

19
© 2022 Veritense™

Mintzberg Management Roles

Managers fill many different roles throughout the day. They switch roles as tasks, situations,
and expectations require. These roles include interpersonal, informational, and decisional. '

Interpersonal roles provide information and include the roles of a figurehead, leader, and
liaison.2° Figureheads have social, ceremonial, and legal responsibilities; they serve as an
authority figure and a source of inspiration. Leaders serve as a leader, and manage
performance and responsibilities. Liaisons communicate with internal and external contacts and
network effectively.

Informational roles process information and include the roles of a monitor, disseminator, and
spokesperson.” Monitors seek information related to their industry, look for changes in the
industry environment, and monitor the team on productivity and well-being. Disseminators
communicate useful information to teams and colleagues. Spokespersons represent and speak
for their organization, and transmit information about their organization and goals to people
outside of it.

Decisional roles use information and include the roles of entrepreneur, disturbance handler,
resource allocator, and negotiator.*° Entrepreneurs create and control change (including
problem solving), generate new ideas, and implement them. Disturbance handlers take charge
when the team hits an unexpected roadblock and mediate disputes within the team. Resource
allocators determine where organizational resources should be applied, allocate funding, and
assign staff and other resources. Negotiators take part in and direct important negotiations
within the team, department, and even organization.

From the Mintzberg’s Management Roles, you can see how the management functions interplay
with the roles, which in turn interplay with other management concepts we've talked about so
far.

How do the management roles fit in with the 5 management functions? Some of the wording of
the management roles are even similar to the language for the management functions. For
example, “resource allocator” fits with both planning and controlling.

Use the Mintzberg’s Management Roles worksheet to digest the text on this page.

20

© 2022 Veritense™

Leadership
What is a leader?

What is an effective leader? An effective leader is one who accepts that change will happen
(and that change is a good thing) and works with others on their team to facilitate the pace and
the outcome of that change.' By working with others, and keeping a positive attitude about
change, the effective leader empowers themselves as a leader and empowers their employees
as teammates.

An effective leader: '

e Copes with change — accepts that change should and will happen, working with others
to set the pace and outcome of that change process

e Empowers employees — empowers themselves and employees as a team to adapt and
embrace change

e Perseveres through difficult processes

In contrast, an effective leader does not need to “cope with complexities” — they accept
complexity as something that will happen and instead, cope with change to facilitate that
environment. ' Furthermore, an effective leader doesn’t seek to be understood by their team —
they should be considered an expert and referent by their employees. '

What Mintzberg Management Role corresponds to a leader being an expert and referent?

Not all managers are effective leaders, and within lower ranks of an organization, employees
may be effective leaders without being a manager.

Just as there are different leadership styles, a single leader's style may change due to the
situation — some styles are more effective when the goal of leadership is compliance, and other
leadership styles are more effective when there is a time limitation.

If the leadership goal is compliance, a leader should be seen as a role model who is legitimate,
an expert, competent, and of a high position in the organization. '

Compliance may be the goal when change has to occur to meet new external guidelines — the
change has to happen, and it has to happen a certain way, so having an effective leader is key
for the process to go smoothly. '

21

© 2022 Veritense™

Leadership Styles

Just as there are management functions and management roles, there are also leadership
styles. Be familiar with these terms and their definitions. Try to envision these scenarios or
relate to a manager you have had to make the text more real.

Transactional leadership?®?’
e Focus is on supervision, organization, performance
e Goal is to maintain the status quo
e Obtains employee followers through rewards and punishments, which typically only lasts
for the short term
e Effective in a crisis; effective when projects have very specific parameters

Transformational leadership?®:?’

e Connects with employees’ sense of identity and dedication to the mission and
organization. In doing so, enhances motivation, morale, and performance

e Aligns followers with appropriate tasks in order to improve performance

e Goal is to change the future

e Acts as a positive role model

e Effective in smaller businesses due to hands-on outreach to employees, rather than in
complex or large organizations

Contingency / Situational leadership”
e Changes leadership approach depending on the situation
e Used when tasks and environment vary, and/or when organizations are open systems
requiring careful management

Compare and contrast transactional with transformational leadership styles.

Leadership Effectiveness Model

The Hersey, Blanchard, and Johnson leadership effectiveness model (commonly abbreviated as
HBL for Hersey and Blanchard leadership model) focuses on situations rather than leadership
styles.*9 It is also called the Situational Leadership Model.

Effective leaders adapt their leadership styles and decision-making styles with the situation. In
terms of the last section on leadership styles, you could say that an effective leader utilizes
contingency or situational leadership styles.

After reading this section, fill out the HBL Leadership Style worksheet (free at www.studysmartermethod.com) or
included with your PTEP purchase.

The leadership effectiveness model capitalizes on this flexibility to increase a leader’s
effectiveness. By adapting to the current situation and leading appropriately, a leader is effective
in meeting the goal. The HBL model is centered around the leader's decision making, and thus
uses an individualistic decision-making approach in contrast to a group decision making
approach.°°

22

© 2022 Veritense™

The HBL model is adaptive and flexible. Leaders consider their team, the environment, and the
task at-hand when making decisions. Thus, this model treats leadership as task-dependent
and relationship-dependent. Task situation refers to an employee’s ability and relationship
situation refers to the employee’s willingness or confidence in their ability. Put in simple steps, a
leader using the HBL model will:

1. Identify the category of follower (employee)
2. Adapt leadership style and behavior to match follower (employee)
3. Continue to assess follower (employee) status and adapt leadership style and behavior

In this leadership style, a leader’s choice depends on the task situation, or an employee’s ability,
and the relationship situation, or an employee’s willingness or confidence.”? Employees, or
groups, are called “followers” in the HBL model, and there are 4 primary situations on the
continuum, described by “maturity” and “readiness”. Using this, there are 4 primary leadership
styles: telling, selling, participating, and delegating. In the following pages, | provide tables that
describe these 4 situations and 4 leadership styles (S1 to S4), and present the HBL grid to help
visualize the continuum on both axes. Then, there is a worksheet for you to fill out.

HBL Leadership Styles

Leadership Style Brief Description Description
; Instruction, direction, Leader gives precise and firm instructions and

$1 | Telling ? ; oe
autocratic deadlines while closely monitoring progress
Persuasion, Leader explains goals, tasks, methods and

S2 | Selling encouragement, reasons, and remains available to followers to
incentive provide support

s3 | Participating Involvement, Leader works with followers, involving the
consultation, teamwork _| group, seeking input, and encouraging efforts

S4 | Delegating Trust, empowerment, Leader gives responsibility to followers to set
responsibility goals, plan, and execute the plan.

When answering a question about the HBL model (likely a case study), you need to consider
the follower situation and the appropriate leadership style.

Maturity Levels

There are 4 maturity levels to describe employees, or followers, that correspond to the 4
leadership styles.*' These maturity levels are commonly abbreviated as M1, M2, M3, and M4.
The “follow situations” that correspond to the maturity level and leadership style are described
on a spectrum of task behavior and relationship behavior. The wording of “task behavior” and
“relationship behavior” may seem a little confusing. Let’s describe them, and then think about
how you can remember what they mean.

Task behavior: How knowledgeable is the employee? Do they have the necessary skills? How
much help will they need from the leader? You can think of task behavior as the degree of
directive behavior required by the leader. When “task behavior” or “directive behavior” is HIGH,
the employee needs to be instructed on every aspect of the task they are being asked to do.
When “task behavior” or “directive behavior’ is LOW, the employee is knowledgeable about the
task at hand and have the necessary skills to get it done

23
© 2022 Veritense™

Relationship behavior: How excited is the employee about the task? How willing are they to
engage in the task? How much motivation will the leader need to provide? You can think of
relationship behavior as the degree of supportive behavior required by the leader. When
“relationship behavior” or “supportive behavior” is LOW, the employee is self-motivated and
does not require a large amount of support from the leader. When “relationship behavior” or
“supportive behavior” is HIGH, the employee requires a large amount of support from the leader
as they may not be confident or excited about the task

M1 are the least experienced workers and are described by some texts as “unable and unwilling’,
corresponding to R1 in the diagram following. The employee may be inexperienced or simply lack the
skills necessary for the task. The employee will require a high level of direction from the leader at every
step and because the leader is guiding them in the tasks themselves, there is a low amount of supportive
behavior required. M1 maturity corresponds to R1 readiness and S1 — telling.

M2 are inexperienced like M1, but are interested in learning. The leader should adapt their style to
provide more supportive behavior to match the employee’s excitement about increasing their skill set. The
leader needs to provide both direction and support.M2 maturity corresponds to R2 readiness and S2 -
selling.

M3 are employees who have most of the skills and knowledge necessary to get the job done correctly,
thus requiring little guidance on the task from the leader. They benefit from supportive behavior to
enhance their confidence and build the employee-leader relationship. M3 maturity corresponds to R3
readiness and S3 — participating

M4 are employees who are confident in their ability to complete at ask and can do so independently,
without direction or support from the leader. M4 maturity corresponds to R4 r4e3adiness and S4 —
delegating.

Remember that the degree of task behavior (directive behavior) and relationships behavior
(supportive behavior) (high or low) is from the perspective of the leader, not the employee.

24

© 2022 Veritense™

The table below highlights the maturity level and readiness level of the employee and the
degree of task behavior and relationship behavior required by the leader. Re-read the definitions
of the S1 through S4 leadership styles and then think about how the leader adapts the amount
of explaining versus encouraging (task versus relationships behavior) when working with an
employee in the different M1 through M4 situations.

Maturity

Employee
Readiness

Employee Situation
Description

Task
Behavior

Relationship
Behavior

Leadership
Style

M1

Unable and
unwilling

Follower lacks
experience or skill and
the confidence to do
the task. May also lack
willingness.

High

Low

$1 Telling

M2

Unable but
willing

Follower lacks ability
(possibly due to lack of
experience) but is
enthusiastic for the
work. Requires high
level of supportive
behavior in order to
learn the skills.

High

High

S2 Selling

M3

Able but
unwilling

Follower is capable
and experienced, but
lacks the confidence or
commitment. May
question the goal or
task.

Low

High

$3
Participating

M4

Able and
willing

Follower is capable,
experienced,
confidence, and
committed to the goals.

Low

Low

S4 Delegating

The HBL Leadership Style and the continuums of high versus low task behavior and relationship
behavior required by the leader for the different follower types is often displayed graphically in 2
ways — one, with the x-axis of task behavior going from high to low, and one with that same axis
going from low to high. | have included both diagrams on the next page. Review them with the
information you've just read and decide which one makes more sense to you. This leadership
style can be particularly tricky to learn because the way that the authors have phrased some of
the terms may not seem intuitive.

25
Supportive Behavior

Readiness

HIGH MODERATE LOW
R4 R3 R2 R1

HIGH
PARTICIPATING SELLING
Encouraging Explaining
5 Problem Solving Persuading
a LOW DIRECTION HIGH DIRECTION
s HIGH SUPPORT HIGH SUPPORT
[aa]
Qa
2
<
2
&
2 DELEGATING TELLING
Observing Guiding
Monitoring Directing
LOW DIRECTION HIGH DIRECTION
LOW SUPPORT LOW SUPPORT
LO
Low —__—__$_$_—$£—_ HIGH

Task Behavior
Directive Behavior

The diagram to the right has telling in the
bottom left corner, because the axis for task
behavior is going from high to low. Notice that

© 2022 Veritense™

The diagram to the left starts with
delegating in the bottom left corner,
meaning that the leader can use the
delegating style with employees that
require low directive (task) behavior and
low relationship (support) behavior from

their supervisor. The leader will spend most
of their time observing and monitoring the
employee, because the employee is at a
R4 readiness, or self-directed, readiness
level. Walk through the other 3 quadrants
and write out an explanation for each one
like | did for delegating.

Readiness

MODERATE HIGH

| Leader directed

Self directed

; ; ; oo HIGH

the readiness bar is going from low to high in
this version of the diagram. SELLING PARTICIPATING

Explaining Encouraging
I’ve included both types of diagrams because . Persuading Problem Solving
: . ; . —
if you did your own research, you’d find these $ HIGH DIRECTION LOW DIRECTION
2 versions. Which makes more sense to you? -£ el HoH SUPPORT

joa)

Use that one to study. xg 2
Remember: The level of task behavior and 25 TELLING DELEGATING
relationship behavior refers to what the leader & 2 Guiding Observing
must do, and corresponds directly to the Directing Monitoring

HIGH DIRECTION LOW DIRECTION
matching leadership style. LOW SUPPORT Low supPORT

LO
HIGH | LOW

Task Behavior
Directive Behavior

26
© 2022 Veritense™

Decision Making
Decision Making Styles

There are 4 decision making styles to know for the exam: democratic, autocratic, consensus,
and participative.°?

Democratic: accepts decision made by group majority
e A foodservice manager defers to her employees to reach an agreement among
themselves, and then she adopts the majority decision.

Autocratic: takes total control, makes decisions, assumes full responsibility
e Most appropriate when needing to initiate several complex, stressful, and simultaneous
changes in a short period of time — when there is little time to consult with individual
employees or the entire group of employees -> involves making decisions with available
information

What leadership style might this go well with? Why?

Consensus: requires entire group to come to an agreement

Participative: leadership seeks input from others before making a management decision (note
that no decision is agreed upon by the group, it’s up to the manager in the end)

On a sheet of paper, list the 4 decision making styles with a brief description.

Decision Making Techniques

Game theory: introduces a competitive component into decision making by bringing the actions
of an opponent into the situation. The goal is to obtain the highest gains with smallest number of
losses, regardless of what a competitor does."

Simulation: uses computers to imitate real-life occurrences and studies their properties,
behaviors, and operating characteristics, such as that in virtual reality. '

Artificial intelligence: technology duplicates the thought processes of experienced decision
makers!

Queuing theory: balancing the cost of waiting in lines against the cost of expanding facilities to
prevent them. For example, balancing the number of cashiers working in the hospital cafeteria
with the number of customers waiting in line’

27

© 2022 Veritense™

Management Concepts & Terms

The following terms are key to the organization function of management. Remember, assigning
responsibility clearly so that everyone knows who they are accountable to, and what authority
they have, is key to effective management. You can skip ahead a few pages to the definitions of
authority, responsibility, capability, and accountability, if that would be helpful.

The 4 E’s

Knowing the difference between these 4 terms is important for the exam.
e Efficient: getting the most output from the least amount of input!
e Effective: doing things well, producing intended results!
e Economical: having good value with respect to the money/time/effort spent’ — aka your total inputs
for the “budget”; an economical approach — aka a “thrifty” approach
e Expedient: suitable for a purpose, given the circumstance’

Stealing

Know the differences between these 5 terms that have to do with stealing.

e Theft: taking property without force’ — “taking” means removing without permission or right, and is
often premeditated

e Pilfering: to steal things of relatively little value’ — aka “petty theft”

e Robbery: taking property that may involve force and person-to-person interaction’

e Embezzling: stealing money or misappropriating money belonging to the employer’

e Burglary: entering a building/residence with intention of theft.’ Burglary does not require that
property is actually stolen, and there may or may not be person-to-person interaction

Scientific Management

By optimizing and simplifying jobs, you can improve productivity that encourages employees
and managers to cooperate with one another. A key aspect of scientific management, versus
other management theories, such as continuous improvement, is that there is “one right way”.
With other types of management theories and styles, there is not only one right way.

Scientific management, also known as “Taylorism’”, has 4 principles*:

1. Replace standard procedures with a “rule of thumb” or simple habit, use the scientific method to study
the work processes, and determine the most efficient way to perform specific tasks.

2. Instead of assigning workers to any job, match workers based on capability and motivation, and then
train them to work at maximum efficiency.

3. Monitor work performance, and provide instructions and supervision to ensure that work is at its most
efficient.

4. Allocate the work between managers and workers so managers spend their time planning and
training, allowing the workers to perform their tasks efficiently.

In the 4 principles above, how is a manager optimizing jobs? Is efficiency synonymous with
productivity? How are employees and managers cooperating?

Which of the 4 E terms is emphasized with scientific management?

28

© 2022 Veritense™

Upward Communication

Upward communication involves communication from the bottom of an organizational hierarchy
to the top, for various reasons.** Whisteblowing uses upward communication and is key in
fraud detection. Top management can also utilize upward communication, such as exit
interviews, as a source of information in making business decisions, reengineering certain
processes, and quality control. However, disadvantages of upward communication include
employees fear to participate and the risk that information is changed when it goes through
each tier of management, like the classic game of telephone. Think about upward
communication again when we talk about organizational structure.

Management by Objective

With a management by objective outlook, the manager works with employees to review
organizational objectives, formulate goals, and then track and monitor the goals that are in
place. Management by objective provides control from within, established performance goals
with employees, and focuses on participative decision making. Remember the definition of
participative decision making? When a manager seeks input from others before making a
management decision.

Delegation

Delegation allows a manager to share responsibility for a task.! Delegation is giving the
appropriate authority to allow the employee to alter procedures in order to achieve the desired
outcome. In contrast, simply telling an employee what to do or micromanaging them by requiring
daily progress reports is not delegating.

Which of the HBL leadership situations would not be delegating?

Since delegation gives responsibility to the employee, it is important for the manager to evaluate
an employee’s skills (or capability) against the difficulty of the task before delegating.

What other concepts have you learned so far to evaluate an employee’s skill?

The Do’s and Don’ts of Delegation

Do’s Don’ts

e Give precise instructions e Do not threaten
e Clarify expected results e Do not use a condescending attitude
e = Anticipate questions e Do not just give answers - illustrate the
e Discuss recurring problems process
e Seek employee ideas about how to do the job e Do not overreact to problems
e Be supportive and exhibit trust e Avoid micromanagement
e Recognize good performance
e Show how a process is done, and explain why

it is done

Delegation facilitates the management process by assigning responsibilities, delegating
authority, and requiring accountability of employees via the concept of the scalar principle. The
scalar principle is the idea that subordinates follow a chain of command and report to their
immediate supervisor, not to a supervisor further up in the chain of command.*°

29

© 2022 Veritense™

Effective delegation depends upon leadership skills, not power.

Go back to the section on decision making styles. Which decision making style would work well
with effective delegation? Why?

The Management Process

The management process begins with establishing objectives and then identifies functions
required to achieve the objectives. Then, the manager determines responsibilities — describes
them and assigns them as appropriate. Finally, the manager delegates by assessing which
employees have the skills and/or resources to achieve the tasks.

*Management process begins
with establishing objectives

*The functions to be included to achieve the

Identify functions objectives

*Tasks or responsibilities must be
described and assigned, as
appropriate

«Assess what employees
have the skills and/or
resources to achieve the
tasks

30

© 2022 Veritense™

Example: Amy is the foodservice Manager at her hospital. She has received additional
objectives from her director and does not have the time to accomplish them. She finds room in
her budget to create a new job, hire an employee, and assign these additional objectives to the
new employee. In order for the employee to successfully meet these delegated responsibilities,
they need authority along with the responsibility of the tasks. The employee does not have
complete control over these additional objectives - they still report back to the Foodservice
Manager. Thus, the Foodservice Manager creates accountability by transferring the
responsibility of these objectives to the new employee, while requiring them to meet certain
standards to consider the objectives achieved. Keep this scenario in mind as we go on to define
authority, capability, responsibility, and accountability.

Authority
Authority is the power to make decisions, such as the decision to Manager
delegate. Decentralized and centralized organizations differ in the
scope of authority at each level of management. Authority flows from
the upper to lower levels of a hierarchy. Authority
Managers have authority to delegate tasks.
Capability
Capability is the mental or physical ability to Delegated tasks requires skillsA & D
perform a task.
A manager can delegate tasks to employees with O ©
the required skills (and thus capability) or if time SkillsA BC SkillsA BD
allows, train those who do not currently have the Capable
skills.
A manager should delegate tasks to employees who are capable.
Responsibility Manager
Responsibility is the obligation to perform an assigned activity, or see
that someone else performs it. eqoncble
Thus, both the manager and employee are responsible for this task. The for arlegated
tasks impart responsibility upon the employee. as
Accountability
Accountability is being responsible for one’s self, to an organization, or Manager
to a manager. Both the manager and employee are accountable for the Emol

mployee

task. The standards of performance impact accountability as the accountable
employee reports back to the manager. for the task, to
the manager

31
© 2022 Veritense™

Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs

According to Maslow’s theory, humans are motivated by a hierarchy of needs in that lower
needs on a hierarchy must be met before achieving the needs higher up on the hierarchy. The
order of needs may differ based on situations or individuals and much of human behavior is
motivated by multiple needs. As you read through this page, fill out the Maslow’s Hierarchy
worksheet or create your own.

Self-fulfillment needs: also known as “being
needs” or B-Needs, motivations are increased
as needs are met

potential

Psychological needs: the need for
interpersonal relationships motivate
behavior at this level, esteem needs
include esteem for yourself (dignity and
Independence), desire for reputation
(status, prestige) with desire for respect
from others is greater among children and
adolescents

Esteem needs:
prestige, feeling of
accomplishment

Belonginess and love needs:
intimate relationships, friends

Basic needs: known as
“deficiency needs” or D-
needs along with
psychological needs;
motivation decreases as
needs are met — and
motivations increase as the
duration of deficiency
continues

Safety needs: security, safety

Physiological needs: food, water, warmth, rest

Basic needs include physiological needs (food, warmth, water, rest) and safety needs
(security and safety). These are also known as deficiency needs or D-needs along with
psychological needs. Motivations decrease as needs are met, and motivations increase as the
duration of deficiency continues.

Next are belonginess and love needs (intimate relationships, friends), and esteem needs
(prestige, feeling of accomplishment)— the psychological needs, referenced above, are the
human needs for interpersonal relationships that motivate behavior at this level. Esteem
includes esteem for yourself (dignity, independence), desire for reputation (status, prestige) and
desire for respect from others. Esteem needs are higher among children and adolescents than
certain adults.

32
© 2022 Veritense™

The highest level of Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs is self-actualization (achieving your full
potential) also called the self-fulfillment needs. In contrast to D-needs, self-actualization
includes B-needs (being needs). These motivations are increased as lower needs are met.

What are B-needs and D-needs?

Motivation increases as needs are met and motivation decreases as

needs are met.

Deficiency needs include which 2 needs?

Psychological needs include which 2 needs?

33

© 2022 Veritense™

Management Theories

Each of these management theories draws on different aspects of Maslow’s Hierarchy as
underlying assumptions and motivations. Connect each listed theory with the leadership theory
or style, and decision-making styles you read about in the previous section.

Theory X

McGregor’s Theory X assumes that employees must be controlled, directed, and coerced.
Other assumptions are that employees have little ambition, they dislike work, are irresponsible,
and will avoid work, if possible. Managers believing in Theory X think that the primary employee
motivation is first monetary and then, security. Managers may use hard or soft management
approaches. Hard management approaches include coercion, implicit threats,
micromanagement, and tight controls and may result in hostility, employees producing poor
work on purpose, and extreme demands from labor unions. Soft management approaches are
permissive in the hopes employees will cooperate but may result in workers wanting greater
reward if they can do less work.

Theory Y

McGregor’s Theory Y assumes that most people not only accept but seek responsibility and
that exerting physical and mental effort at work is as natural as play or rest. °° Managers
believing in Theory Y believe that most people will exercise self-control to achieve an
organizational objective. Theory Y builds on the esteem and self-actualization needs from
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs. Note that managing via Theory Y does not mean a manager must
use a “soft approach”. Key tools for managers using Theory Y include: decentralization and
delegation, broadening the scope of an employee’s job description, consulting employees in
decision making (participative management), and having employees set goals and conduct self-
evaluations.

Theory Z of Ouchi

Theory Z of Ouchi is a “Japanese Management” style that boomed in the 1980’s. Japanese
employees were empowered and productive, leading to high quality products at low prices.
Managerial assumptions about employees were that employees desired affiliation and expected
support from their company, and that family culture and traditions are important, both at work
and at home. Extensive training is a tool in Theory Z management to develop a sense of order
and moral obligation to work hard and produce quality work. Managers believing in Theory Z
focus on improving employee loyalty to the organization by improving their well-being, both in
and outside of work. Benefits of this managerial style include stable employment (low turnover),
high productivity, high morale, and high employee satisfaction.°° Companies using this form of
management typically have slow promotions, group decision-making, and life-time employment
opportunities.

Divide a sheet of paper into 3 columns (or use this one) and label each column with one of the theories (Theory X,
Theory Y, Theory Z). What sort of parallel descriptions did you read in this section that allow you to compare and
contrast the 3 theories? Fill in your paper with descriptions, examples, and whatever else makes sense to you to
understand the difference and benefits of each theory.

34

© 2022 Veritense™

Organizational Structures
Unity of Command

Unity of Command: each employee is accountable to only one superior. Considered to be a
traditional or classical management approach.*°

Scalar Principle

Scalar Principle: a management rule where each employee reports directly to their higher up
and no one else. Authority and responsibility flow via delegation in a direct line, vertically from
highest to lowest levels. This principle is also known as the chain of command. *°

Line Authority

Line Authority: when multiple employees report to a single administrator, such as 20 clinical
RDs reporting to one nutrition manager. There is still a chain of command but it is via line
authority (multiple employees to one supervisor) versus the one-to-one in Unity of Command. *

Synergy

Synergy: when the outcome of multiple employees working together is greater than the sum of
them working alone; you can replace the word “employees” with functional units; it’s a practical
approach for getting results. '

Managers can foster synergy by creating teams of people who complement each other, facilitate
collaboration through open work spaces, and set common objectives that let team members
overcome individual differences.

Synergy can also be used in marketing and is particularly effective for small businesses or
departments that lack a large budget for an aggressive marketing campaign. Synergy in
marketing is when multiple low-cost initiatives are launched, rather than a single large initiative.
For example, let’s say the bakery department at your hospital wants to increase sales. The
manager creates a brochure with photos of their pastry trays, fruit trays, and muffin options. She
sends the brochure to all hospital departments with a special offer to bundle the breakfast
catering service with discounted coffee service.

Divide a sheet of paper into 4 quadrants and label each with unity of command, scalar principle,
line authority and synergy. Organize the text you just read into those boxes.

Centralization versus Decentralization
In a centralized organization, decision making authority is centralized in upper management.*”

Centralized organizations are good for established and detailed processes, close control of
operations, uniformity of policies, practices, and procedures and a better use of centralized
and/or specialized experts.

35
© 2022 Veritense™

A centralized organization has a limited amount of authority that is delegated between
management levels. Decisions regarding day-to-day operations are decided upon by executives
or business owners and polices are established to ensure consistency throughout the
organization.

In a decentralized organization, decision making authority is delegated down to the lower levels
of management.°’

Decentralized organizations are good for adaptability and innovation, quick decision-making,
training experience for future promotions to higher management, diverse businesses, and
geographically dispersed companies.

A decentralized organization has a significant amount of authority delegated to lower levels of
management. Upper management delegates decision-making and tasks to lower levels and
maintains open communication.

How is Theory Y related to de/centralization?

Centralization and decentralization are opposites of one another and exist on a spectrum. A
company or department does not have to be fully centralized or decentralized. A start-up that
needs adaptability and teamwork would do better with a decentralized structure. On the other
hand, a large organization, like a pharmaceutical company with headquarters on multiple
continents, would use a combination of centralized organization and decentralized organization.

Neither centralization or decentralization is considered effective or ineffective on its own — the
effectiveness of the organizational structure depends on the attributes of the organization.

Scope of Authority

In centralized organizations, the scope of authority is greater at upper management levels than
lower management levels. In decentralized organizations, the scope of authority is similar at all
management levels. '

Centralized Decentralized

Management Level

36

© 2022 Veritense™

Span of Control

Span of control is at the individual manager level, not the organizational level.*8 A manager’s
span of control is their ability to efficiently and effectively supervise all work sites and workers.
What reduces a manager’s span of control? Complicated work, geographical or departmental
dispersion of workers, and vague policies.

e Define span of control.
e Would a set of standardized personnel policies increase or decrease a manager's span
of control? Why?

Study Guide Questions

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your first pass at
applying the knowledge you’ve read and practiced in example calculations in a question-and-answer
format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your notes.

Use your notes and the text in this section to answer these 2 questions.

1. A friend of yours gets promoted from director of her foodservice department to regional director. She
is now responsible for individual department directors across a five-state area. Will her span of control
increase or decrease? Why?

2. Contrast scope of authority and span of control.
Select one of the choices between parentheses and fill in the explanation blanks when indicated.

3. Acompany produces infant formula and has offices across the United States. They would likely
benefit from a (decentralized or centralized) organizational structure because

4. Anonprofit health organization interacts with government officials, healthcare professionals, and
education representatives. Their market span is (diverse or not diverse) and would likely benefit
from a (decentralized or centralized) organizational structure.

5. A hospital's foodservice department has a Director, Nutrition Manager, Foodservice Manager, and
HR Manager. The clinical RDs report to the Nutrition Manager; foodservice staff report to the
Foodservice Manager; and support staff report to the HR Manager. Each week, all managers meet
with the Director to get project approvals. All employees are required to follow the same policies
and procedures. This department is an example of a (decentralized or centralized) organizational
structure.

6. A large research organization has several highly qualified expert scientists and maintains several
lab locations across the world, with an expert at each location. They advertise that the advantage of
using their lab services is the high quality and standardized lab procedures. It would be best for
them to use a (decentralized or centralized) organizational structure because

37
Centralized

 —
a ce

Decision making authority
centralized in upper
management

Good for:
¢ Established & detailed processes

¢ Close control of operations

¢ Uniformity of policies, practices, and
procedures

¢ Better use of centralized and/or
specialized experts

© 2022 Veritense™

Decentralized

TH

Authority delegated
through lower levels of
management

Good for:

¢ Adaptability and innovation

* Quick decision-making

* Good training experience for future
promotions to higher level
management

* Diverse businesses

* Geographically dispersed companies

38
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions (Answers)

1.

A friend of yours gets promoted from director of her foodservice department to regional director. She
is now responsible for individual department directors across a five-state area. Will her span of control
increase or decrease? Why?

Geographical dispersion of workers will reduce a manager’s span of control, so in this scenario, her
span of control will decrease. Other factors that decrease span of control include complicated work,
workers across several different departments, and vague policies that are difficult to implement or
enforce.

Contrast scope of authority and span of control.
Scope of authority is at the organization level while span of control is at the individual level.

A company produces infant formula and has offices across the United States. They would likely
benefit from a (decentralized) organizational structure because it is a geographically dispersed
company.

A nonprofit health organization interacts with government officials, healthcare professionals, and
education representatives. Their market span is (diverse) and would likely benefit from a
(decentralized) organizational structure.

A hospital's foodservice department has a Director, Nutrition Manager, Foodservice Manager, and
HR Manager. The clinical RDs report to the Nutrition Manager; foodservice staff report to the
Foodservice Manager; and support staff report to the HR Manager. Each week, all managers meet
with the Director to get project approvals. All employees are required to follow the same policies
and procedures. This department is an example of a (centralized) organizational structure.

A large research organization has several highly qualified expert scientists and maintains several
lab locations across the world, with an expert at each location. They advertise that the advantage of
using their lab services is the high quality and standardized lab procedures. It would be best for
them to use a (decentralized) organizational structure because of the geographically diverse
locations despite having standardization and experts.

39
Line Organization

In scalar principle, unity of command, and line authority, authority flows
down from top to bottom and responsibility flows up from bottom to top.
All 3 of these concepts are part of line organization.

Advantages of line organization include fixed responsibility (no
confusion about who should do what) and quick decision making.

Line organization has clearly defined levels of authority, responsibility,
and accountability at each level of management. It is the simplest and
most traditional form of organization. Even though it is the simplest
form, it can be seen in the most complex organizations.

Functional Organization

In functional organization, units are divided based on

Authority

v

i
:

© 2022 Veritense™

Middle
Mgmt

specific functions like operations, finance, marketing,
human resources, food service, nursing, etc.°° Withineach | “°

functional unit, there will be levels of authority. Thus, line
authority can exist within other forms of organization.

Keep functional organization in mind when we talk about systems approach later on. Come
back to this page and think about how healthcare systems are organized and where the

foodservice department fits in.
Line and Staff Organization

Line and staff organization is a combination of line
organization with shoot-offs, where staff report to

various levels of management and may have more
than one supervisor to report to. Would this be line =o
authority or scalar principle?

Managing
Director
Manager
DivisionB

HR Manager HR dept

Manager
DivisionC

DivisionC
Staff

Instead of functional units, line and staff organization have functional lines that are managed by
a specialist supervisor. While the combination of line and staff organization is more complex
than just line organization or functional organization, line and staff organization combine the
efficiency of line organization and the effectiveness of functional organization.

You can imagine the diagram on the upper right being expanded to include branches for legal,
finance, and HR departments with their own division managers and staff. Line authority is in the
solid black arrows going down, where authority goes from top to bottom and responsibility goes
from bottom to top. Staff authority is shown by the horizontal dashed lines that go from the
managing director to special division managers like legal advisor, HR manager, and financial

advisors.

40

Ayyiqisuodsay
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Part 1)

Answer these practice questions using the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™ that you read about in
Chapter 2 and 3 of the Study Smarter Method for the RD-Exam section. Instead of answering these
questions using your memory and logic, use the study guide text and/or your own research to determine
which answer is correct (and why), and why the other answers are incorrect. Pay attention to the question
itself, and be sure you know what the question is asking. There are answers with explanations following.
If this is your first set of practice questions, go back and skim Chapters 2 and 3 in the Study Smarter
Method for the RD-Exam section to remind yourself of the types of questions and how to answer them.

1. Which of the following is not a functional subsystem of the foodservice system?
a. Procurement
b. Storage
c. Sanitation
d. Maintenance

2. Which of the following is not a management function?

a. Staffing
b. Delegating
c. Planning

d. Organization

3. Which of the following statements regarding management functions is TRUE?
a. Management functions are used to coordinate subsystems in order to achieve
objectives

b. Staffing includes assigning duties to employees and delegating authority
c. Controlling functions involve using different leadership styles depending on the
situation
d. Organization tasks include using problem solving to ensure resources are used
properly
4. The management function ensures all employees know who they are

accountable to and also improves worker safety.
a. Organization
b. Planning
c. Staffing
d. Directing

5. Employee training falls under which management function?
a. Controlling
b. Planning
c. Staffing
d. Organization

41
d.

b.
c.
d

© 2022 Veritense™

Which of the following scenarios is an example of progressive employee discipline?
a.

An employee has been late to work every day this week. Their manager documents
the tardiness in their file, and then issues them a suspension on Friday.

A new employee arrives to work with an unkempt appearance, which violates the
employee dress code. Their manager speaks to them during the shift and issues a
verbal warning and reviews the employee dress code with them.

A supervisor sees an employee being disruptive on the patient tray line during lunch
preparations. The supervisor removes them from the tray line and issues them a
written warning.

A dietetic intern on their foodservice rotation is conducting a quality audit of the
pudding cups sold in the cafeteria. The intern notes that the weight of each pudding
cup varies greatly and reports her findings to the food service manager.

Which of the following is the correct order of steps involved in controlling?
a.

Establish standards, measure performance, compare actual and standard
performance, take remedial action

Establish standards, compare actual and standard performance, measure
performance, take remedial action

Measure performance, establish standards, measure performance, compare actual
and standard performance, take remedial action

Establish standards, measure performance, take remedial action, compare actual
and standard performance

Which of the following statements is TRUE regarding value-based healthcare?
a.
b.
C.

Accountable care organizations are examples of value-based healthcare
Fee-for-service is another name for value-based healthcare

Value-based healthcare incentivizes health care providers to increase the quantity of
tests and treatments

BandC

Which of the following statements if TRUE regarding labor unions?
a.

A bargaining unit can be spread between several labor unions

Local unions can be based on geography or specific companies

The National Labor Relations Act outlawed closed shops

An open shop means an employee does not need to be a union member to be hired,
but must become a member within a certain amount of time following their start date

10. A leader is an example of a role while a negotiator is an example of a

Qo p

role.
Informational, decisional
Decisional, informational
Interpersonal, decisional
Interpersonal, informational

42
© 2022 Veritense™

11. You are the Director of Foodservice Operations and have hired a new Associate Director.
Your new AD does not have a lot of experience but shows great interested in learning the
skills and knowledge necessary to excel in their new role. Which answer choice describes
the HBL leadership style you should adopt with your new AD?

a. Instructive, directing, autocratic

b. Involved, consulting, teamwork-oriented

c. Trusting, empowering, giving responsibility
d. Persuasive, encouraging, incentivizing

12. You've joined a new foodservice department and learn that the department is divided into
separate units for each foodservice subsystem. This organization can be described as

Scalar

a.
b. Line organization

c. Functional

d. Line and staff organization

43
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Part 1) (Answers)

1. Which of the following is not a functional subsystem of the foodservice system?
a. Procurement
b. Storage
c. Sanitation
d. Maintenance

Answer: B. The 5 functional subsystems of the foodservice system are procurement, production,
distribution and service, sanitation, and maintenance.

2. Which of the following is not a management function?

a. Staffing

b. Delegating
c. Planning

d. Organization

Answer: B. Delegating is part of the Organization function but is not a function itself. The 5 management
functions are planning, organization, staffing, directing, and controlling

3. Which of the following statements regarding management functions is TRUE?
a. Management functions are used to coordinate subsystems in order to achieve objectives
b. Staffing includes assigning duties to employees and delegating authority
c. Controlling functions involve using different leadership styles depending on the situation
d. Organization tasks include using problem solving to ensure resources are used properly

Answer: A. Organization includes assigning duties to employees and delegating authority. Directing
functions involve using different leadership styles depending on the situation. Planning tasks include
using problem solving to ensure resources are used properly. Note that planning tasks and controlling are
tightly woven together, where planning tasks are completed to ensure resources are used properly while
controlling functions such as measuring performance and taking corrective action follow-up and check to
see if resources are used properly.

4. The management function ensures all employees know who they are accountable to
and also improves worker safety.
a. Organization
b. Planning
c. Staffing
d. Directing

Answer: A. The organization management function involves identifying activities that need to be
completed and delegating them, as well as assigning responsibility meaning everyone knows who they
are accountable to and what authority they have. Successful planning and organization work together to
avoid duplication of efforts (and therefore effective use of time and personnel resources). Organization is
key for a safe work environment and can improve worker safety, which pays-off for the company because
there are decreased costs associated with workman’s compensation and lost workdays, while also
building an environment that shows employee’s care. Go to pages 6 and onwards and write your own
question for each of the management functions.

44
© 2022 Veritense™

5. Employee training falls under which management function?
a. Controlling
b. Planning
c. Staffing
d. Organization

Answer: C. Employee recruitment, screening, and selection of new employees as well as training,
supervising, and evaluation current employees falls under staffing.

6. Which of the following scenarios is an example of progressive employee discipline?

a. An employee has been late to work every day this week. Their manager documents the
tardiness in their file, and then issues them a suspension on Friday.

b. Anew employee arrives to work with an unkempt appearance, which violates the employee
dress code. Their manager speaks to them during the shift and issues a verbal warning and
reviews the employee dress code with them.

c. A supervisor sees an employee being disruptive on the patient tray line during lunch
preparations. The supervisor removes them from the tray line and issues them a written
warning.

d. A dietetic intern on their foodservice rotation is conducting a quality audit of the pudding cups
sold in the cafeteria. The intern notes that the weight of each pudding cup varies greatly and
reports her findings to the food service manager.

Answer: B. Progressive discipline (escalation) includes these 4 steps for formal documentation: 1) verbal
warning, 2) written warning, 3) suspension, 4) termination. Answer choice A does not refer to any time
that the manager has spoken with the tardy employee prior to the suspension on Friday. Answer choice C
skips over the first step (verbal warning). Answer choice D does not include any information about
discipline. The next step that the food service manager takes would be the scenario about discipline. Note
that consistency is also key when disciplining employees — an employee should feel like they are getting
the same treatment that any other employee would for the same offense. Identifying solutions to correct
undesirable behaviors, providing feedback on performance, and identifying causes for unacceptable
behavior are all processes involved in employee discipline specific to improving outcomes, but the most
important, overarching idea is consistency.

7. Which of the following is the correct order of steps involved in controlling?

a. Establish standards, measure performance, compare actual and standard performance, take
remedial action

b. Establish standards, compare actual and standard performance, measure performance, take
remedial action

c. Measure performance, establish standards, measure performance, compare actual and
standard performance, take remedial action

d. Establish standards, measure performance, take remedial action, compare actual and
standard performance

Answer: A. The 4 steps involved in the management function of controlling is to establish standards (also
known as the targets to achieve), to measure performance, then compare actual performance to the
standards set in step 1, and then take remedial, or corrective, actions to correct deviations. In the last
step you may also revise the standards. The true function of controlling is achieved in the least step of
taking corrective action.

45
© 2022 Veritense™

8. Which of the following statements is TRUE regarding value-based healthcare?
a. Accountable care organizations are examples of value-based healthcare
b. Fee-for-service is another name for value-based healthcare
c. Value-based healthcare incentivizes health care providers to increase the quantity of tests
and treatments
d. BandC

Answer: A. Volume-based healthcare is also called fee-for-service healthcare and incentivizes health
care systems and providers to provide more treatments and tests for patients rather than focusing on
high-quality treatment. The Affordable Care Act created the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation
within CMS to develop and test alternative payment models, where the ‘alternative’ was in contrast to the
traditional fee-for-service care. Accountable care organizations, or ACOs, were one of the first alternative
payment models.

9. Which of the following statements if TRUE regarding labor unions?
a. A bargaining unit can be spread between several labor unions
b. Local unions can be based on geography or specific companies
c. The National Labor Relations Act outlawed closed shops
d. An open shop means an employee does not need to be a union member to be hired, but
must become a member within a certain amount of time following their start date

Answer: B. A bargaining unit is a group of employees with clear and identifiable common interests and a
union might represent one or more bargaining units, but a bargaining unit cannot be divided between
multiple unions. The Taft-Hartley Act, a pro-management act passed in 1947, outlawed closed shops and
permitted union shops in certain scenarios. What did the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 achieve? A
union shop refers to situations where an employee doesn’t need to be a union member to be hired but
must join the union within a certain time period after beginning work. Union shops are illegal in some
states. What is a closed shop, agency shop, and open shop?

10. A leader is an example of a role while a negotiator is an example of a _
role.
a. Informational, decisional
b. Decisional, informational
c. Interpersonal, decisional
d. Interpersonal, informational

Answer: C. This question refers to Mintzberg Management Roles, which are interpersonal (figurehead,
leader, liaison), informational (monitor, disseminator, spokesperson), and decisional (entrepreneur,
disturbance handler, resource allocator, and negotiator). Managers fill different roles throughout the day
and switch roles as the task, situation, and expectations require them to.

46
© 2022 Veritense™

11. You are the Director of Foodservice Operations and have hired a new Associate Director. Your new
AD does not have a lot of experience but shows great interested in learning the skills and knowledge
necessary to excel in their new role. Which answer choice describes the HBL leadership style you
should adopt with your new AD?

a. Instructive, directing, autocratic

b. Involved, consulting, teamwork-oriented

c. Trusting, empowering, giving responsibility
d. Persuasive, encouraging, incentivizing

Answer: D. The scenario in the question describes an employee at M2 maturity / R2 readiness (unable
but willing) which requires S2 (selling) leadership style, which involves persuasion, encouragement, and
incentives where ethe leader explains goals, tasks, methods, and reasons and remains available to
provide support. Answer choice A describes S1 (Telling) leadership, answer choice B describes S3
(participating) leadership, while answer choice D describes S4 (delegating) leadership.

12. You’ve joined a new foodservice department and learn that the department is divided into separate
units for each foodservice subsystem. This organization can be described as___
a. Scalar
b. Line organization
c. Functional
d. Line and staff organization

Answer: C. In functional organization, units are divided based on specific functions, with line authority
existing within each functional unit. Line organization utilizes scalar principle, unity of command, and linen
authority with clearly defined levels of authority from top management down to staff. Line and staff
organization is a combination structure that has functional lines of authority that exist within multiple levels
of management. Rewrite this question twice, once so the answer would be line organization and once so
the answer would be line and staff organization.

47
© 2022 Veritense™

Part 2

Systems Theory
A system is a set of interdependent parts that work together to achieve a common goal.'

Management is the integration and coordination of resources to achieve the desired objectives
of the organization.

Organizations are open systems, influenced by and interacting with external forces in its
surrounding environment. They are comprised of interdependent parts, or subsystems, that
interact via feedback, operations / transformations, and in the setting of controls, management,
and memory.

Don’t worry about identifying how “systems thinking”, “systems theory”, and “systems analysis”
are different. Instead, recognize that all 3 terms are key to thinking about organizations as
systems. They all relate to systems thinking and theory, and you should be aware that different
terms exist but refer to this overarching concept.

Systems Systems Systems
Thinking Theory Analysis

Systems theory

is a way of viewing an
organization as a system
made up of
interdependent parts, or
subsystems

Six Foundational Concepts

Read about the 6 foundational concepts to systems theory on the next page to help you better
understand what systems theory is. Think about how a food service manager might implement a
systems approach in their management style. Don’t worry about memorizing these foundational
concepts. Use them to provide context.

48
© 2022 Veritense™

Six Foundational Concepts of Systems Theory

1)

6)

Organizations are a collection of parts, united by interactions and designed for
accomplishing specified objectives and goals.

Organizations are interdependent and not self-contained, as they operate within a society.
Organizations are highly complex and attention should be given to the various inputs,
processes, outputs, feedback loops, and general environment under which and within the
organization functions.

Organizations constantly interact with the environment that changes them and in return,
change the environment.

The organization cannot be understood as a function of the isolated parts, because the
behavior of the system depends on how each part interacts with the others, not what each
part is doing.

Organizations exist in dynamic equilibrium, that is, they react to internal and external
changes and forces in ways that create a new state of equilibrium and balance.

According to systems theory, organizations:

e are acollection of parts united by e are highly complex
interactions e constantly interact with the environment —
e are designed to accomplish specific changing both the organization and the
objectives environment, and existing in dynamic
e are interdependent and not self- equilibrium
contained e must be understood by considering all parts
Takeaways

e Concepts 1 and 2: Organizations are systems, made up of subsystems, and need to be
managed. Write the definition of management from Part I.

e Concepts 3 through 6: The interactions of subsystems, operations, and transformations,
include feedback with internal and external environments.

5 Essential Processes in Systems Theory’

1.

DESIRED OUTPUTS: Identify an organization’s fundamental values and the goals and
objectives that arise from those values
e Outputs include finished products and services
ENVIRONMENT: Assessment of the organization’s environment as opportunities or threats
INPUTS: Assessment of the organization’s resources and capabilities
e Inputs include resources like money, materials, time, personnel, facilities, and
information
OPERATIONS: Identification of an organization’s structure
e Operations refer to the work done to transform inputs into outputs, also known as
transformation
MANAGEMENT: Development of the organization’s management structure
e Functions of management (list them from Part 1):
e Linking processes: communication, decision making

49
© 2022 Veritense™

You should know examples of inputs, outputs, and linking processes, as well as the definitions
of the key terms on the next page.

Other Terms to Know

Transformation: the processes required to change inputs into outputs

Interdependency: key to an efficient and effective system. Allows for continual

relationships and interaction between the subunits within an organization.

Feedback: information on how operations worked or failed, or how they should be

changed or modified to restore equilibrium (can be internal or external)

Equifinality: outputs may be achieved in a variety of ways, such as producing quality

meals (outputs) from both raw ingredients in-house and/or quality pre-prepared products

(inputs)

Linking processes: used by managers to unify a system. Include communication and

decision making.

Remember in the Part | overview, | told you we’d talk about systems approach? Note how the
management part of the systems approach above mentions functions but also linking
processes. Those may sound similar to things we discussed in Part I, and they are, but the

theories are distinct.

Some of the terms defined in this subsection were used in the 6 foundational concepts. Take

out a sheet of paper and summarize the 6 foundational concepts, highlighting the key terms and

defining them. Does knowing the specific definition of those key terms, like interdependency,

help you understand the foundational concepts better?

CONTROLS
Plans
Contrast
Laws, regulations

INPUTS
Raw materials
Information
Energy
Personnel
Facilities
Time, money

ENVIRONMENT
Regulatory agencies
Economy

Society, culture

MANAGEMENT
Functions: planning, organization,
staffing, directing, controlling
Linking Processes: communication,
decision making

OPERATIONS & TRANSFORMATIONS

|| Storage &
Inventory

| Receiving

MEMORY
Financial
Personnel
Forecasting

OUTPUTS
Finish goods
Services, ideas
Financial accountability
Customer satisfaction
Employee satisfaction

f | Distribution Production
| Service | Sanitation
ry
Feedback

50

© 2022 Veritense™

Foodservice Systems Model

The Foodservice Systems Model categorizes system components as inputs, outputs, or the
transformation processes that change inputs to outputs. ' It is an example of using a systems
approach to food service management.

Raw
Materials Inputs

* Time

* People

« Raw materials
¢ Information

« Money

Transformation Processes
Purchasing Sanitation * Purchasing

¢« Production
\ ¢ Sanitation
Production * Service
Outputs
¢ Finished products
* Services

* Finished goods (i.e. meals)
* Customer + employee satisfaction
¢ Financial accountability

Subsystems and Feedback

Systems thinking is a management approach that thinks about the organizational unit as a
whole when making decisions or allocating resources.

Subsystems are complete systems unto themselves but are also part of a larger system.

Departments are examples of subsystems. There can be tension and conflict when the
activities of two subsystems overlap.' This can occur when there are no boundaries or there is a
permeability of boundaries.

51
© 2022 Veritense™

Example: Patient Tray Service

Patient
Tray
Service

Food and nutrition is responsible for delivering patient
trays and nursing is responsible for patient care.
However, the interface between nursing and food and
nutrition service, regarding all the details of patient tray
service, isn’t very clear. There are no official boundaries
communicated by either department in terms of activity r
limitations. This situation leads to clashes between staff |'-----= | ----- Patient
in the 2 subsystems. Care

I
|
|
I
Nutrition lebenneneted

Production

Example: Cold Food and Feedback -The dietetic technicians and dietitians hear from the
patients and cafeteria customers that the food is cold. The DTRs and RDNs relay this
information to the food service manager, who discusses recipe changes with the chef, trickling
down to the line cooks. Using a systems approach, evaluating the effectiveness of a new policy
should consider both the internal and the external environments via feedback (See next page
for a diagram).

In this example, internal feedback comes from the patients and customers about food
temperature to the diet tech or the dietitian. Internal feedback occurs within a department, so the
communication between the DTR/RDNs, foodservice manager, chef, and line cooks is also
internal feedback.

External feedback, such as that from The Joint Commission or the health inspector, is external
feedback. In this example, there is no external feedback. Don’t be fooled by thinking the
feedback from the patients and customers is external feedback.

FEEDBACK

EXTERNAL

The Joint Health
Commission Inspector

INTERNAL

recipe
Patients and changes
customers

DTR, RDN

Line cooks

52
© 2022 Veritense™

Functional Subsystems

Organizations may be divided based on function. In food service, functional units may include
procurement, production, distribution and service, sanitation, and maintenance.

Transformation processes depend on the resources available, such as equipment, staff,
inventory, and time. When asked about the most important resource for various functional
subsystems, think about what that subsystem’s purpose is and if it could function without the
listed resource. '

Example: For a distribution and service subsystem, equipment like steam tables are key. Fora
catering service, chafers and similar items would be key equipment. For patient service, having
staff to re-heat and serve the meals is key. Don’t always think that staff is necessary — with the
steam table example, technically customers can serve themselves, but without the steam table,
staff wouldn’t have warm food to serve.

What resources are important for the foodservice subsystems listed below?

Foodservice
Director

Procurement Production Distribution Sanitation Maintenance
& Service

53
Study Guide Questions

© 2022 Veritense™

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your first pass at
applying the knowledge you’ve read and practiced in example calculations in a question-and-answer

format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your notes.

1. Which of the following represent transformation processes? Circle all that apply.

Following standards

Establishing goals and objectives
Communication

Management functions
Functional subsystems

Linking processes

“9 A950

2. Judah is the manager of a hospital’s foodservice department. Customer feedback over
the past quarter was not very positive. For the new quarter, Judah is implementing a
brand-new menu that will require more foods to be prepared from scratch. Which of the
following are examples of systems thinking? Why? Answers at the end of the section.

a. Judah needs to reorganize kitchen staff duties and schedules to account for new
food production needs from the prep cooks, line workers, and dish washers.

b. In an effort to increase department revenue and cover the cost of new
equipment, Judah creates a catering menu. He distributes it to department

heads, offering catering services for their monthly meetings.

c. To accommodate the new food recipes, Judah selects a produce vendor who can

deliver fresh, high-quality produce twice a day.

d. A staff member brings up that the current cleaning chemicals used in the
dishwasher are not environmentally friendly. She submits a proposal to Judah to
change all cleaning chemicals over to ones that do no harm the environment.

3. Match the terms and scenarios in the left-hand column to the term in the right-hand

column. Some terms may be used more than once.

Customer satisfaction
Distribution

Employee satisfaction

The Food Production Manager agrees to reorganize the hot

and cold food stations to facilitate productivity.

Planning and directing

e The line cooks receive information from the RDN about recipe
modifications.

e Requirements per the Americans with Disabilities Act

The health inspector provides an assessment of the dish room.

Output
Linking process
Transformation

External feedback

Management
Internal feedback
Environment

54
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions (Answers)

1. Which of the following represent transformation processes? Circle all that apply.

a. Following standards - no

b. Establishing goals and objectives - no

c. Communication - no

d. Management functions — yes, and includes planning, organizing, staffing,
directing, and controlling

e. Functional subsystems — yes, and includes procurement, production, sanitation,
distribution and service, and maintenance

f. Linking processes — yes, and includes decision making, communication, and
balance

2. Judah is the manager of a hospital’s foodservice department. Customer feedback over
the past quarter was not very positive. For the new quarter, Judah is implementing a
brand-new menu that will require more foods to be prepared from scratch. Which of the
following are examples of systems thinking?

a. Judah needs to reorganize kitchen staff duties and schedules to account for new
food production needs from the prep cooks, line workers, and dish washers.

Yes, this is systems thinking because it changes the kitchen, the staff, and allocated resources
completely, and across the entire department. New recipes require new ingredients, new
production schedules, and thus, new dishwashing and support staff schedules.

b. In an effort to increase department revenue and cover the cost of new
equipment, Judah creates a catering menu. He distributes it to department
heads, offering catering services for their monthly meetings.

No, this is not an example of systems thinking but is a good management approach to offset the
cost of new equipment needed for the new menu.

c. To accommodate the new food recipes, Judah selects a produce vendor who can
deliver fresh, high-quality produce twice a day.

No, this is not an example of systems thinking because it only addresses one component of the
foodservice subsystem — ingredients.

d. A staff member brings up that the current cleaning chemicals used in the
dishwasher are not environmentally friendly. She submits a proposal to Judah to
change all cleaning chemicals over to ones that do no harm the environment.

No, this is not an example of systems thinking. It only addresses one component of the
foodservice subsystem — sanitation, and does not relate to the project at hand.

55
© 2022 Veritense™

3. Match the terms and scenarios in the left-hand column to the term in the right-hand

column. Some terms may be used more than once.

e Outputs are finished products and services, and include employee and customer

satisfaction.

e Distribution is one of several operations or transformational processes that change

inputs to outputs.

e Feedback can be internal (from within the organization or subsystem), such as the
feedback between the line cook and RDN, or external (from outside the organization or

subsystem), such as the health inspector assessment.

e Management includes linking processes and the 5 functions of management, which

include planning and directing.

e The Food Production Manager scenario is an example of linking process, not
feedback, because it is an example of communication, which is a linking process.
e Laws and regulations from external organizations, such as those from the Americans

with Disabilities Act, are considered “environment”.

Customer satisfaction

Output

Distribution

Transformation

The health inspector provides an assessment of the dish room

External feedback

Employee satisfaction

Output

The Food Production Manager agrees to reorganize the hot and cold
food stations to facilitate productivity

Linking process

Planning and directing

Management

The line cooks receive information form the RDN about recipe
modifications

Internal feedback

Requirements per the Americans with Disabilities Act

Environment

56
© 2022 Veritense™

Strategic Planning

Strategic planning is, “the continuous and systematic management process to determine long-
term goals, the best approach to accomplish them, and how success will be measured.”' It is
used to inform policies and operational decisions. It is not used in evaluation.

Strategic planning may also be called strategic management. It is a form of organizational and
environmental analysis used to establish goals and success criteria by implementing strategies
to move towards those goals. ' A key part of strategic planning is evaluating progress towards
the goal.

With strategic planning, we ask the questions:

Where are we now?
Where are we going?
How do we get there?
Are we on track?

The following are descriptions of strategic planning. Think of antonyms for these to solidify the
concept of strategic planning in your mind. Contrast what it is NOT with what it IS.

Strategic planning is... Strategic planning is NOT...

Continuous

Systematic

Future-thinking

Creates a plan to accomplish outcomes

Analyzes the organization in context of
environment

Determines success criteria

Evaluates progress in achieving outcomes
and success

57
© 2022 Veritense™

Marketing
Marketing is concerned with: '

e Customer wants — focus on producing the goods customers
want

e Profit — maximize net profit rather than focusing on total sales

e Future growth — forecasting future growth

The 4 P’s of Marketing

Marketing mix is an effective way to understand what products or services can offer and how to
present the product successfully. There are 4 P’s of Marketing (mix):*°

1. Price: pricing affects how a product is sold; linked to perceived value of product; must
understand how a consumer sees the product because a price too high OR too low will
hinder sales.

2. Promotion: marketing communication strategies and techniques, including advertising,
sales promotions, special offers, and public relations. Must be suitable for product, price,
and end user. Promotion is the communication part of the entire marketing function.

3. Place: how is the product provided to the customer? Placement strategy assesses the
most suitable channel and must complement the rest of the product strategy.

4. Product: a tangible good or intangible service; developed to meet a specific consumer
need and demand. Need to understand the problem the product is trying to solve and
then convey the benefits to the consumer.

Fill in the blank diagrams on the Marketing Worksheet as an active learning review for the 3
points of marketing and the 4 P’s of marketing mix.

58

© 2022 Veritense™

Marketing Eras

To understand marketing, it can be helpful to understand the different eras marketing has gone
through.

Production era: manufacturers focused on mass production

Sales era: marketing strategies shifted to pricing techniques to revitalize sales as
markets became crowded with product

Marketing era: shift to marketing techniques
Technological era: utilizes emerging technologies to reach potential customers

PRODUCTION SALES MARKETING TECHNOLOGICAL

Market Segmentation

Marketing strategies often utilize market segmentation to design marketing campaigns. There
are 4 broad ways to segment the market.

Geographic: physical location
Psychographic: personality, interests, beliefs
Behavioristic: consumer behaviors towards products

Demographic: age, sex, race, ethnicity, income, education, and occupation — they
describe a person

59
© 2022 Veritense™

Marketing Lifestyle Groups

There are 8 VALS (Values and Lifestyles) Segments of American Adult consumers (Innovators,
Survivors, Makers, Experiencers, Strivers, Achievers, Believers, and Thinkers). They describe
mindsets by psychographic traits and demographics in how they drive consumer behavior.*"
The 2 important aspects of each term are primary motivation and resources. Their combination
determines how each person expresses themselves in the marketplace as a consumer. Be able
to match each term with their descriptors.

We describe VALS groups in terms of primary motivation and resources.

Primary motivations include ideals, achievement, and self-expression. Innovators are
motivated by all 3 to different degrees, while survivors have no primary motivations. Thinkers
and Believers are motivated by ideals. Achievers and Strivers are motivated by achievement.
Experiencers and Makers are motivated by self-expression.

Resources go beyond income and include energy, self-confidence, intellectualism, novelty
seeking, innovativeness, impulsiveness, leadership, and vanity. Different levels of resources
improve or constrain how a person expresses their primary motivation.

Primary Motivation

Achievement Self-Expression

thi

Guided by knowledge and Demonstrate success to those Social activity, physical activity,
principles around them variety, and risk

* Traditional codes: family,

religion, community, country * Outward expressions of

achievement and success * Building, fixing, creating

¢ Intellectual codes: order,
knowledge, responsibility . * Exciting experiences
* Income and possessions

* Contemporary codes

60
© 2022 Veritense™

Think about how Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs fits in with these marketing lifestyle groups.

Innovators: have high income, high self-esteem. Successful and sophisticated, take-
charge. Abundant resources and exhibit all 3 primary motivations: ideals, achievements,
self-expression

Survivors: live narrowly-focused lives; believe the world is changing too quickly as they
have few resources with which to cope; comfortable with the familiar and concerned with
safety and security; do not have strong primary motivation because they are focused on
meeting needs, not fulfilling desires

Makers: have lower income; focus on self-sufficiency and family; express themselves
and experience the world by working on it — building a house, raising children, fixing a
car, home-canning vegetables; have the skill and energy to carry out their projects

Experiencers: are young, impulsive; seek variety, excitement, and risky activities; have
self-expression, enthusiasm— quickly become enthusiastic about new possibilities but
equally quickly move on

Strivers: trendy, fun loving, motivated by achievement and concerned about the
opinions and approval of others; they define their success by money

Achievers: successful individuals, typically high income, motivated by a desire for
achievement, have goal-oriented lifestyles, and a deep commitment to career and family

Believers: motivated by ideals, conservative and conventional, concrete beliefs based
on traditional codes — family, religion, community, the nation

Thinkers: motivated by ideals, mature, satisfied, comfortable, and reflective. Value
order, knowledge, and responsibility.

Primary Motivation

Ideals Achievement Self-Expression
@ Tp
High
Resources Innovators
$$$

Moderate Thinkers Achievers Experiencers

Resources

$$

Believers Strivers Makers

No primary motivation

Low Resources
$ Survivors

61
© 2022 Veritense™

Cultural Competence & Humility

On the following pages, you'll see written descriptions of several cultural competence models
along with more in-depth diagrams. In the Management Worksheets you'll find blank versions of
the diagrams that follow.

Cultural competence: a set of congruent attitudes, behaviors, and policies that come together;
organizations and institutions implement systems to apply cultural competence into practice.”
Shortcomings of cultural competence include the tendency to center “whiteness” as
representing the norm with cultural competence a lack of knowledge of “other”,** the implication
that there is an endpoint of being “culturally competent”, and the suggestion that you can apply
categorical knowledge about a group to a person, which can lead to stereotyping and bias.**

Cultural humility: the ability to maintain an interpersonal stance that is “other-oriented” (open
to the other) in relation to aspects of cultural identity most important to the client. Cultural
humility requires awareness and sensitivity to historic realities (including legacies of violence
and oppression against certain groups) in addition to exploring and awareness of your own
personal beliefs.** Please read this article on cultural humility in healthcare:

https://bit.ly/8wjGOnx

Cultural sensitivity is awareness of similarities and differences between different cultures.

The dominant force in how a patient views healthcare is individual experience.*? Social
hierarchy, race, and ethnicity are secondary drivers. There are several models of cultural
competence that touch on different parts of the healthcare system.

The ETHNIC Model of culturally competent care

How does a patient’s understanding of their illness and treatment fit with what is expected and
accepted in their culture? How can we determine treatment options in a collaborative (not
imposed) process? This model focuses on questions and conversations providers should have
with patients to achieve their goals. The model stands for: Explanation, Treatment, Healers,
Negotiation, Intervention, Collaboration. (Steven J Levin, MD; Robert C Like, MD; Jan E
Gottleib, MPH 1997)

The LEARN Model

The LEARN model was designed to overcome communication barriers in health care
encounters. The model stands for: Listen, Explain, Acknowledge, Recommend treatment,
Negotiate agreement. (Elois Ann Berlin, William C. Fowlkes, Jr in 1983)

The BATHE Model

This model helps create a culturally competent environment, focusing on the psychosocial
context for the patient’s visit rather than medical details. The model stands for: Background,
Affect, Trouble, Handling, Empathy. (Marian Stuart, PhD and Joseph A Lieberman III, MD MPH

62
© 2022 Veritense™

The ETHNIC Model

Explanation

« Why do you think you have these symptoms?

¢ If you know other people with this condition, how are they addressing them?

¢« Whatdo your friends and family say about these symptoms?

« Have you heard about these symptoms in the media, such as the television or newspaper?

Treatment

« Whatkinds of medications or other remedies have you experimented with to treat your illness?

¢« Whatsorts of foods and drinks do you consume or avoid to stay healthy, or specifically, to treat this illness?
¢« Whatkind of treatment are you seeking from the practitioner?

Healers

¢ Have you sought advice about your illness from nontraditional sources?
¢ Whatdid you like about this method of treatment?

Negotiation
«What changes do you expect to achieve with this treatment?

Intervention

* How do you feel about the treatment plan?
« Which components of the treatment plan are you most concerned about

Collaboration

¢ Here are the ways that other health care team members will help with the treatment plan.
« Here are some community resources and some ways that your friends and family might help you with the
following treatment plan.

63
© 2022 Veritense™

The LEARN Model

Listen — with empathy and understanding to how the patient perceives the
problem. Ask open-ended questions about what they think is the illness’ cause,
process, duration, and outcome, and the resources that they have.

Explain — your perceptions of the problem. Explain the strategy for addressing
medical complaints, particularly for patients unfamiliar with Western health
care, can help avoid misunderstandings.

Acknowledge — and discuss the differences and similarities. Conceptual
reconciliation of the patient explanation and the clinician explanation especially
regarding causes, symptoms, and treatment for the illness.

Recommend - treatment. They should be rooted in the resolution
achieved in the Acknowledge step of this process.

Negotiate — agreement. With the patient and practitioner partnered, they
should develop a treatment plan agreed upon by both parties. 64
Sewew

© 2022 Veritense™

The BATHE Model

Background - educe the reason for the
patient visit. Ask “What is going in your
life?”

Affect - provide the patient an
opportunity to report how they feel about
the problem. Ask “How have you been
feeling about what is going on?”

Trouble - provide focus to the visit while
still extracting the significance of the
problem (in the patients perception). Ask
“What about the situation concerns you
the most?”

Handling - facilitates discovery of what the
patient has been doing so far, which can
inform the intervention course. Ask “Before
now, what have you been doing to address the
problem?”

Empathy - provide support to the patient
by legitimizing their response to the
problem. “This must be difficult for you”.

65
© 2022 Veritense™

The GREET Model

This model is useful when working with immigrant populations and helps providers understand
the context of the patient and how they understand information related to their illness.
Generation, Reason, Extended family, Ethnic behavior, Time living in the United States. (Nilda
Chong, MD PhD MPH 2002)

Acculturation is the assimilation to a different culture.

Acclimation is the process or result of becoming accustomed to a new climate or conditions.

Campinha-Bacote Model

Starting in the individual, this model states that cultural competence expands to the family and
community level. The 5-step process focuses on 1) awareness, 2) knowledge, 3) skill, 4)
encounter, and 5) desire.

Awareness involves challenging assumptions and asking client questions about their values,
beliefs, and practices, resulting in acquisition of cultural knowledge. With cultural knowledge,
the provider familiarizes themselves with variations in cultural impact and expands their cultural
skills to collect key information in order to conduct effective assessments and decide on an
intervention that takes into account preferred language, foods consumed or avoided (especially
when feeling ill), and foods consumed or avoided for religious reasons.

This cultural encounter is the best time to discuss nutrition. The final step is cultural desire,
where the practitioners want to engage in cross-cultural care. (Joseph Campinha-Bacote, PhD
1998)

Know the definitions of the 5 steps.
The Purnell Model

This model is derived from multiple theories and includes 16 assumptions about culture. “A
culturally competent health care provider develops an awareness of his or her existence,
sensations, thoughts, and environment without letting these factors have an undue effect on
those for whom care is provided.” — Larry Purnell, PhD RN FAAN.

Explanatory Models Approach

This model “eschews the trait list approach that understands culture as a set of already known
factors and instead, emphasizes engagement with others and with the practices that people
undertake in their local worlds and the ambivalence that many people feel as a result of being
between worlds, including those who self-identify with multiple cultural groups.” It is a 6-step
“mini-ethnography” approach that has health care providers use their expert knowledge next to
the patient’s own explanation and viewpoint.

(Arthur Kleinman, MD and Peter Benson, MD)

66
© 2022 Veritense™

Explanatory Models Approach

}c-Jem ie Ethnic Identity

* Inquire as to a patient’s ethnic identity
* — Is itan important construct in their self-identity?
* Helps avoid assumptions that lead to stereotyping

SC:jea What is at stake?

Evaluate concerns about relationships, resources,
commitments, and life

To better understand patients and their families in
the context of their “moral lives”

S\(:Yeae The Iliness Narrative

*« Ask a sequence of questions to discover how the
patient defines their illness both pragmatically and
personally

« “What do you call this problem?” “What do you believe
cause this problem?” “What do you believe is
happening inside your body as a result of this
problem?”

Psychosocial stresses

* Recognizing the patient's anxiety, financial stresses,
and troubles related to work and family regarding the
illness and treatment, the provider can make better
recommendations to alleviate those burdens
Illness is frequently accompanied by depression and
anxiety which can worsen health outcomes

Influence of culture on clinical
relationships

« Providers should self-reflect on the “formative effect of
biomedicine and institutions on the most routine
clinical practices including bias, inappropriate and
excessive use of technology, and stereotyping”

SJtcJemags Problems of cultural
competency approach

« Acknowledging that one size does not fit all

* Culturally competent interventions is not always the
best intervention because “attention to cultural
differences can be interpreted as intrusive’ or “lending
excessive significance to differences misguides
finding the root cause of the problem”

67
© 2022 Veritense™

The GREET Model

Generation Reasons Extended Family Ethnic Behavior Time living in
the US
How acculturated §Whydidthe patient Has acculturation Traditional
is the patient? immigrate? been affected by language, clothing, Amount of time living
family? and rituals may be in the country may
indicative of the suggest lower
degree of acclimation
adjustment to US
culture

68
© 2022 Veritense™

The Campinha-Bacote Model

Cultural awareness

Self-examining your own biases and exploring your
own cultural and professional background

Cultural knowledge

Seeking and obtaining sound educational base about culturally diverse
groups. Integrating learned health-related beliefs and values into
practice

Cultural skills

oO
Collect relevant cultural data regarding a client's presenting
problems and accurately conducting a culturally-based physical

| @
it) assessment
Cultural desires
Internal motivation of HCP to engage in the process of becoming
culturally competent

Cultural encounters

Engaging in face-to-face cultural interactions with clients from culturally diverse backgrounds
to modify existing beliefs and prevent stereotyping

69
© 2022 Veritense™

The Purnell Model of Cultural Competency

The Purnell Model for Cultural Competency describes primary and secondary characteristics of culture, with an additional focus on

an unconscious to conscious spectrum alongside an incompetent to competent spectrum. There are also 12 aspects of this person-
model that contribute to cultural competence. You can think of the Purnell Model as concentric circles of global society, community,
family, and person (depicted on the next page).

Age Educational status Marital status
Generation Socioeconomic status Parental status
Nationality Occupation Physical characteristics
Race Military status Sexual orientation
Color Political beliefs Gender issues
Gender Urban vs rural residence Reasons for migration
Religion Enclave identity (Sojourner, immigrant,
undocumented status)

Unconsciously Consciously Incompetent Consciously Competent Unconsciously
Incompetent Competent

Not being aware that one is | Being aware that one is Learning about the client’s Automatically providing
lacking knowledge about lacking knowledge about culture, verifying culturally congruent care to
another culture another culture generalizations about the clients of diverse cultures

client’s culture, and

providing culturally specific

interventions

70
© 2022 Veritense™

Workforce issues Death rituals Health-care practitioners

Acculturation Death rituals Perceptions of practitioners
Autonomy Bereavement Folk practitioners
Language barriers Gender & health care

Global Society

Pregnancy Overview/heritage High-risk behaviors

Fertility practices Origins Tobacco

Views towards pregnancy | Residence Alcohol

Pregnancy beliefs Topography Recreational drugs
Birthing Economics Physical activity
postpartum Politics Safety

Education

Occupation

Bicultural ecology Health-care practices

Focus on health care Transplantation

Biological variations >. : rr .
6 Traditional practices Rehabilitation/chronicity

Skin color . wt : -

: Magicoreligious beliefs Self-medicine
Heredity ~ Oo oe
Genetics Responsibility for health Pain/sick role
Ecology Mental health barriers

Drug metabolism

Spirituality Family roles and organization

Head of household Roles of aged
Gender roles Extended family
Goals & priorities Social status
Developmental tasks Alternative lifestyles

Religious practices
Use of prayer
Meaning of life
Individual strength
Spirituality & health

Nutrition Communication

Dominant language Facial expressions
Dialects Greetings

Meaning of food

Common foods
Rituals Contextual use Temporality
ienci Volume/tone Time
Deficiencies Spatial distanc i
Limitations patial distancing ames

Health promotion Eye contact Touch

© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Part 2)

Answer these practice questions using the Study Smarter Method by Veritense ™ that you read about in
Chapter 2 and 3 of the Study Smarter Method for the RD-Exam section. Instead of answering these
questions using your memory and logic, use the study guide text and/or your own research to determine
which answer is correct (and why), and why the other answers are incorrect. Pay attention to the question
itself, and be sure you know what the question is asking. There are answers with explanations following.
If this is your first set of practice questions, go back and skim Chapters 2 and 3 in the Study Smarter
Method for the RD-Exam section to remind yourself of the types of questions and how to answer them.

1. Which of the following statement sis FALSE regarding systems theory?

a.
b.
c.

d.

Organizations exist in dynamic equilibrium with the environment

Organizations are a collection of parts united by interactions

Organizations are a collection of simple units that should be considered separately
from one another

Organizations should be designed to accomplish specific objectives

2. Amarketing manager asks employees to think of new ways to reach their target audience.
Which of the 4 P’s does this activity fall into?

a.

b.
c.
d

Price
Promotion
Place
Product

requires awareness and sensitivity to historic realities in addition to

awareness of your own personal beliefs.

a.

b.
c.
d

Cultural competence
Cultural humility
Cultural sensitivity
None of the above

4. Which cultural competence model focuses on overcoming communication barriers in
healthcare encounters?

a. Purnell

b. LEARN

c. BATHE

d. GREET

5. Cultural refer to a healthcare providers internal motivation to engage in the
process of becoming culturally competence.

a. Skills

b. Awareness

c. Desires

d. Knowledge

72
© 2022 Veritense™

6. Which cultural competence model was developed to address the effect of acculturation on a
patient’s health?

a.

ao

FOCUS
GREET
BATHE
LEARN

7. The BATHE model stands for:

Qaoop

Background, affect, trouble, handling, empathy
Background, acknowledge, trouble, handling, explain
Beliefs, affect, treatment, healers, explanation

Beliefs, affect, time living in US, healers, ethnic behavior

73
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Part 2) (Answers)

1. Which of the following statement sis FALSE regarding systems theory?
a. Organizations exist in dynamic equilibrium with the environment
b. Organizations are a collection of parts united by interactions
c. Organizations are a collection of simple units that should be considered separately from one
another
d. Organizations should be designed to accomplish specific objectives

Answer: C. Organizations are highly complex, and they cannot be understood by considering isolated
parts, because the behavior of the total organization system depends on the interaction between parts.
Review the Six Foundational Concepts of System Theory.

2. Amarketing manager asks employees to think of new ways to reach their target audience. Which of
the 4 P’s does this activity fall into?

a. Price

b. Promotion
c. Place

d. Product

Answer: B. Promotion includes marketing communication strategies and techniques such as how the
company is reaching their target audience and how their product is perceived by their end user.
Promotion is the communication part of the entire marketing function. Price affects how a product is sold
and is linked to perceived value of product. Place refers to how the product is provided to the customer.
Placement strategy assesses the most suitable channel and must complement the rest of the product
strategy. Product is the tangible good or intangible service developed to meet a specific consumer need
and demand.

3. requires awareness and sensitivity to historic realities in addition to awareness of
your own personal beliefs.

Cultural competence

Cultural humility

Cultural sensitivity

None of the above

aoop

Answer: B. Cultural humility is the ability to maintain an interpersonal stance that is “other-oriented”
(open to the other) in relation to aspects of cultural identity most important to the client. Cultural humility
requires awareness and sensitivity to historic realities (including legacies of violence and oppression
against certain groups) in addition to exploring and awareness of your own personal beliefs. Please read
this article on cultural humility in healthcare cited in the text, if you haven't already: httos://bit.ly/SwjGOnx .
Cultural competence is a set of congruent attitudes, behaviors, and policies that come together;
organizations and institutions implement systems to apply cultural competence into practice. What are the
shortcomings of cultural competence? Cultural sensitivity is awareness of similarities and differences
between different cultures.

74
© 2022 Veritense™

4. Which cultural competence model focuses on overcoming communication barriers in healthcare

encounters?
a. Purnell
b. LEARN
c. BATHE
d. GREET

Answer: B. The LEARN model was designed to overcome communication barriers in health care
encounters. The model stands for: Listen, Explain, Acknowledge, Recommend treatment, Negotiate
agreement. The Purnell model of cultural competency is derived from multiple theories and includes 16
assumptions about culture. There are primary and secondary characteristics of culture, and then a
spectrum of competence from unconsciously incompetent to unconsciously competent. The GREET
model involves exploring acculturation and acclimation when working with immigrant populations to help
healthcare providers understand their patient’s context and how they understand their information in
relation to their illness. GREET stands for Generation, Reason, Extended family, Ethnic behavior, Time
living in the United States. The BATHE model helps create a culturally competent environment, focusing
on the psychosocial context for the patient’s visit rather than medical details. The model stands for:
Background, Affect, Trouble, Handling, Empathy. Did you find this question to be vague and tricky? You
could argue that al the answer choices address communication barriers, but the BEST answer would be
the LEARN model. When answering questions for the RD exam, you shouldn't have to argue your
selection. For example, much of a healthcare providers interaction with a patient involves communication,
but when you look at what the letters in each model stand for, which ones are about how the provider
communicates and which are about additional information that should be obtained? If you were looking
for the answer choice “ETHNIC model” you’re on the right track, as that model is also communication
focused. The ETHNIC model involves considering how a patient’s understanding of their illness and
treatment fit with their culture. This model focuses on questions and conversations providers should have
with patients to achieve their goals. The model stands for: Explanation, Treatment, Healers, Negotiation,
Intervention, Collaboration

5. Cultural _ refer to a healthcare providers internal motivation to engage in the process of
becoming culturally competence.
a. Skills
b. Awareness
c. Desires
d. Knowledge

Answer: C. This question nis asking about the Campinha-Bacote Model of Cultural Competence, which
includes cultural awareness, cultural knowledge, cultural skills, cultural desires, and cultural encounters.
Be able to define each one.

15
© 2022 Veritense™

6. Which cultural competence model was developed to address the effect of acculturation on a patient’s
health?

a. FOCUS
b. GREET
c. BATHE
d. LEARN

Answer: B. The GREET model involves exploring acculturation and acclimation when working with
immigrant populations to help healthcare providers understand their patient’s context and how they
understand their information in relation to their illness. GREET stands for Generation, Reason, Extended
family, Ethnic behavior, Time living in the United States. The BATHE model helps create a culturally
competent environment, focusing on the psychosocial context for the patient’s visit rather than medical
details. The model stands for: Background, Affect, Trouble, Handling, Empathy. The LEARN model was
designed to overcome communication barriers in health care encounters. The model stands for: Listen,
Explain, Acknowledge, Recommend treatment, Negotiate agreement. The FOCUS model is a
performance improvement model.

7. The BATHE model stands for:
a. Background, affect, trouble, handling, empathy
b. Background, acknowledge, trouble, handling, explain
c. Beliefs, affect, treatment, healers, explanation
d. Beliefs, affect, time living in US, healers, ethnic behavior

Answer: A. The BATHE model helps create a culturally competent environment, focusing on the
psychosocial context for the patient's visit rather than medical details. The model stands for: Background,
Affect, Trouble, Handling, Empathy.

76
© 2022 Veritense™

Part 3

Performance Improvement Models
FOCUS — PDSA Model

The FOCUS model'® is often combined with the PDSA model. As a manager, the FOCUS
model helps you identify the problem and the PDSA model cycles you through the process of
implementing a successful solution. The PDSA model and the PDSA cycle are the same thing.
For the exam, know what each letter stands for and an idea of what happens in each step.

The FOCUS Model

Find the problem
* Identify a process to improve
¢ Use Pareto and Cause-and-Effect to select the most important problem

Organize a team

* Develop the team and establish objectives

* Interdisciplinary team more likely to find a creative solution
« Include those with a stake in the problem’s resolution

Clarify the problem

« Explain current processes and develop the problem statement
* Break down the problem into sizeable chunks that can be analyzed and solved more easily

Understand the problem

*Recognition of sources of variation

Identify the fundamental steps in the process that will bring the biggest improvement
«Generate as many possible solutions through structured thinking and brainstorming

Select a solution

¢ Use decision-making techniques to select the most viable option
¢ Think about consequences of the solution and make a go/no-go decision

“S882

There are worksheets in the Management Packet to help you do some active learning for all of
the models presented.

77
© 2022 Veritense™

PDSA Cycle

The Plan-Do-Study-Act cycle is a four-stage, problem-solving model that is used to improve a
process or carry out change.*©

Remember that it is a cycle and that the team can go through several iterations for success,
such as pilot studies and small-scale implementation. That’s when the A cycles back to the P.

The PDSA Cycle
DO
PLAN * Implement possible intervention
* Typically as a pilot study or on

* Determine how changes
a small-scale

will be implemented
¢ What will you measure?

ACT

* Reflect on the plan
and the outcomes

« What are the next
steps?

STUDY

* Determine the impact of
the intervention

¢ Examine measures you
planned for

78
© 2022 Veritense™

Total Quality Management

Total Quality Management, or TQM, is focused on improving processes in response to customer
needs.

TQM is acompany culture and attitude that is driven by satisfying customers via products and
services, with continuous improvement methods that involve all employees in all departments.
TQM treats employees as “internal customers”.*°

These 8 aspects are key to TQM:*°

e Customer-focused

e Strategic approaches

e Total employee involvement
e Continuous improvement

e Process-centered

e Fact-based

e Integrated system

e Communication

Quality Improvement vs Quality Assurance

Note that there is a difference between quality improvement programs and quality assurance
programs. Quality assurance “measures compliance against certain necessary standards,
typically focusing on individuals”, *” whereas quality improvement is a continuous improvement
process focused on processes and systems. QA tends to be defense with a focus on providers.
QI is proactive and preventative in nature, focusing on patient care.”*® Outcomes, meeting
standards, prevention, standard procedures, and diagnostics are key aspects of quality
assurance programs but not quality improvement programs.

79
© 2022 Veritense™

IOM Framework for Health Care Quality

The Six Domains of Health Care Quality was put forth by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) for
quality assessment. These six domains make up the “IOM Framework for Health Care Quality.”

Go to hittp://www.ahrg.gov/talkingquality/measures/six-domains.htm! or type “Six Domains of

Health Care Quality” or “IOM Framework for Health Care Quality” into a search engine to fill out
the definitions of each domain below.

Safe

Effective

Patient-
Centered

Timely

Efficient

Equitable

What is the difference between efficient and effective?

What does it mean for health care to be equitable?

80
© 2022 Veritense™

Continuous Quality Improvement Continuous Quality Improvement
. . . -49
Continuous quality improvement programs: entity > describe
e Identify problems C XN
e Implement corrective action
e Study the effectiveness of the solution revise analyze

the data to make decisions for gradual and
continuous improvement to programs and
processes. *?

CQI is an ongoing cycle of collecting data and using { CQI J

learn test

CQI takes a broad look at the overall system within implement EF

which different programs and processes operate,

and keeps that system in mind when identifying problems, implementing corrective action, and
studying the effectiveness of the solution. Does that sound like systems theory?

The key tenants of CQI are:
e Customer satisfaction
e Data collection via the scientific method
e Team involvement

Customer satisfaction directs the CQI process towards what should be examined. Data
collection, via the scientific method, provides high quality data to guide the improvement
process. Team involvement encompasses the system level and includes people from all areas
that the improved program or process might touch.

A non-nutrition example of CQI is how the motor vehicle industry develops new versions of cars
each year, incorporating improvements based on user experience studies (such as adding
technology and comfort), environmental concerns (hybrid and electric cars), and changing
demographics (increased market for family-size vehicles). Look at the evolution of the Ford
Mustang!

81
© 2022 Veritense™

Kaizen

Kaizen is a Japanese word for “continuous improvement” or “change for the better”.
“Kai” means change and “zen” means “for the better’. The concept of KAIZEN™ is a
Japanese business philosophy regarding the processes that continuously improve
operations and involve all employees.°*° It was introduced in 1986 by Masaaki Imai.

KAIZEN™ can be applied to personal or work life and the main differentiating factor of
this continuous improvement method compared to others, in the work space, is the
involvement of all employees, rather than dictating changes from management levels
down to workers. This process can be used to improve product quality, worker
productivity, and relationships between labor and management.

The 5 Principles of KAIZEN™ are:

1. Know your customer — create customer value by identifying their interests and
then enhance the customer experience.

2. Let it flow — everyone in the organization should aim to create value and
eliminate waste

3. Go to Gemba - value is created where things actually happen, and so you
should follow the action. Gemba refers to workplace, with the dichotomy that
many managers work in a separate area from where laborers work, such as ina
manufacturing or packaging facility. How can managers make effective changes
if they never observe and participate in how things are actually done?

4. Empower people — set the same goals for teams and provide a system and tools
so they can reach their goals.

5. Be transparent — use real data to show tangible and visible performance
improvement results

The KAIZEN™ process involves practicing, learning, and improving, and adhering to the
5 principles with determination. The Kaizen Institute describes the process in these
clear statements:*"

e Good processes deliver good results e Take action to correct root causes of
e Go see for yourself to grasp the current problems
situation e Work as ateam
e Speak with data, manage by facts e KAIZEN™ is everybody’s responsibility

The KAIZEN™ Change Model has 4 pillars:

Daily KAIZEN™ - change Gemba behaviors and culture

Breakthrough KAIZEN™ — to implement new paradigms and processes

Leaders KAIZEN™ — to develop KAIZEN leaders

Support KAZIEN™ — build long term capability with steering and infrastructure to
embed KAIZEN™ Culture

PONS

82
© 2022 Veritense™

The Kaizen Institute has a Youtube channel — now that you’ve been exposed to the
information for the first time, help it sink in further by watching some of their
informational videos. You can also read through some KAIZEN™ case studies at
www.kaizen.com/blog to take these abstract principles and pillars and see how they are
applied in the real world.

FADE Quality Improvement Model

The FADE Quality Improvement Model, sometimes called the FADE Performance Model, was
established to improve healthcare quality.

The FADE model incorporates 4 key aspects of effective quality improvement initiatives:°?

1) Considers both systems and processes

)
2) Focuses on patients
3) Focuses on being part of the team
4) Focuses on the use of data

You can see that with aspects 1, 3, and 4, the FADE model is similar to the CQI model, which
makes sense because they are both focused on quality improvement.

FADE stands for Focus, Analyze, Develop, and Execute.

FADE Quality Improvement Model

Generate a list of Decide what you Generate promising Gain commitment
problems need to know solution
Execute plan
Select 1 problem Collect data Select solution
baselines and Monitor impact

Verify and define the patterns Develop

problem implementation plan
Determine influential
factors

We focus by generating a list of problems, selecting 1 problem, and then verifying and defining
the problem. We analyze by deciding what we need to know, collecting data baselines and
patterns, and determining influential factors. We develop by generating promising solutions,
selecting solutions, and developing implementation plans. Finally, we execute by gaining
commitment from the team, executing the plan, and monitoring impact.

83

© 2022 Veritense™

An important part of nearly all of the models presented in this section is that they take time at
the beginning to assess what really needs to be done, and they take time at the end to see if it’s
working. We don’t assume we know what’s best to fix a situation, go in and do it, and then move

on to the next part.
RUMBA

The RUMBA model stands for
reasonable, understandable,
measurable, believable, and
achievable.° It’s an individualized
model that you can use as a
manager to engage your team with
change. An effective leader accepts
change as a part of life and works
with their team to embrace it.

RUMBA

Reasonable
Creating reasonable goals increases team buy-in
and creative processes

Understandable
Verbalizing team goals in an easy-to-understand
way means everyone is on the same page

Measurable
By creating measurable goals, the team won't
become disillusioned

Believable

Demonstrate your belief (as manager) in the
success of the project

Achievable

Explaining specific milestones is key (in addition to
laying out the overall plan) to stimulate personal
achievement

84
© 2022 Veritense™

Project Management Tools

Pareto Chart

In the FOCUS model section, the diagram mentions Pareto Charts and cause and effect charts
in “F” for “Find the problem”. Pareto charts have 2 components: a bar graph that represents the
descending frequency of occurrence (or cost), and a line graph representing the cumulative
percentage of total occurrences (or cost).

Why do we use Pareto charts? By ordering the occurrence of a complaint in descending order,
we can identify the complaint that has the largest effect on satisfaction.*° We can also determine
the number of factors we need to address in order to reduce complaint frequency by a certain
percent. If the chart represents cost rather than occurrence, then you can imagine that
addressing the most expensive problem, or knowing how many problems you need to address
to cut costs to meet your budget, would be helpful.

Example: Diner Complaints - The chart tabulates the number of diner complaints in
categories: impolite server, difficulty getting server’s attention, automatic gratuity of 18%,
inaccurate check calculations, incorrect meals, dirty utensils or tables, slow service, serving cold
meals (incorrect temperature), and loud or distracting diners at other tables. On the secondary
axis, we have the cumulative percent of each complaint. We use the cumulative percent to
figure out that if we want to reduce complaints by 75% (horizontal line), we should address the
top 3 factors — impolite servicers, difficulty getting servers attention, and automatic 18% gratuity,
because if we follow the thick line corresponding to the secondary access, we reach about 70%
after the first 3 categories. If we didn’t construct this Pareto chart, we might instead focus on
other factors on the list based on our subjective improvement, and then not see the
improvement in complaints we are looking for. It’s all about collecting data to fix your problem.

Pareto Chart of Frequent Diner Complaints

=
N
o

r 100
F 90

=
o
o

fF 80
f 70

a
o

- 60

L 50
+ 40
L 30
L 20
[AL ,

Number of Complaints
oy o>}
oO o

Cumulative Percent

N
o

Oo

Impolite Difficult to get Automatic Inaccurate Mealsdonot Dirty utensils Slow service Meals at Loud or
servers attention of grauity calculation match or tables incorrect distracting
server of 18% added _ of check by what was temperature diners
server ordered at other tables

Type of Complaint

85
© 2022 Veritense™

PERT Chart

PERT chart stands for “Program Evaluation Review Technique” and is a project management
evaluation tool used for effective planning at the management level. We use it to schedule,
organize, and coordinate tasks within a project. °°

To construct a PERT chart:

1) Each task necessary to complete a project is written in nodes (blank boxes in this example).

2) Directional arrows represent sequential tasks — one must be completed before another. Not
all tasks are sequential; some can be performed at the same time.

3) The amount of time needed to complete each activity is written along each line — it could be
days, weeks, hours, or months.

4) Critical path analysis is a bolded line that shows the longest path by duration to complete
the project as described in the chart.

Nodes are key tasks or milestones, and might be a rectangle or a circle, with the task written
inside. Or, the node might have a number and the tasks listed in a separate table. Parallel tasks
without direct arrows going from one task to another can occur at the same time. Breaking a
project down into necessary tasks is a key step in effective project management in general.
Creating sequences between the tasks is helpful, especially if different people are working on
those tasks. Critical path analysis provides you, as the manager, and your boss, with an idea of
the longest time the process might take.

PERT charts may also be used to work backwards from a hard deadline. We would subtract the
amount of time needed for each activity to get our start date.

Finally, PERT charts are helpful for project managers to evaluate and analyze which resources
(labor, time, materials) are needed for a project, as well as track the progress of the project. If a
project includes multiple departments, having a master PERT chart can help facilitate

86
© 2022 Veritense™

communication and make sure everyone is on the same page, especially if a task in your
department is dependent on a task in another department.

The time component of the PERT chart is invaluable. As a manager, you can estimate the
shortest time the project might take, the longest, and “what-if” analyses, like “what if step 2
takes longer than we expect?” Any step or task that has a large impact on the final deadline is a
“risk” and should be carefully monitored.

Note that the time estimates for PERT charts are just that — estimates. It’s a planning procedure
and is better than not considering time at all, but the time requirement isn’t guaranteed. PERT
charts work best if you have detailed knowledge of the tasks and processes that will be involved
and can easily fill out the components. If a large amount of research is required to determine
duration and cost, and the time spent on that research isn’t offset by the benefit of the PERT
chart, then another project planning tool may be a better choice.

Cause and Effect Diagram

Cause and effect diagrams are also called “Ishikawa” diagrams, named after their developer,
Kaoru Ishikawa, or “Fishbone Diagrams’ because of the format.

These diagrams can be used to identify problems for continuous quality improvement programs,
like the F step of the FOCUS model.™ It can also be used in less formal processes to discover
bottlenecks and root causes of problems.

To construct a cause and effect diagram:

1) Write down the problem to one side as the fish head

2) Brainstorm major factors that might affect the situation by drawing lines off the center
spine

3) Write down causes (horizontal lines) that contribute to each major factor

4) Add further sub-causes with more branches off of the cause lines (vertical) and their
factors (horizontal)

5) Analyze the diagram

Cause Cause
x w
Ro) g > Ry
& iS (oy &
« Cause — @ Cause Ry
RS > < S
Xe) 5 é
> >
y ¥
Cause Cause
Problem
Cause Cause
4 %
Z
% Cause L QO. Cause
a, Ss “a
Ss > %
2° C. A.
& C ‘e a
°. ause Cause

87
© 2022 Veritense™

An advantage of cause-and-effect diagrams is that they often reveal causes that are not obvious
at first, and if addressed, lead to effective solutions.

What would the diagram look like if you only had major factors and causes (no sub causes or
sub-factors)? What if you had sub-causes and factors for each node?

Planning Processes

There are several planning processes that may be used in keyword questions on the exam.
These include:

e Delphi method
e Delbecq’s nominal group technique
e Charettes

Delphi method: a group of experts are contacted individually and anonymously with
questionnaires.*° Their responses are statistically tallied and summarized in a report which is
sent back to the experts with another questionnaire. The goal of the Delphi method is to reduce
the range of responses from experts and arrive at what might be called a consensus.

RESULTS FINAL REPORT

and
RECOMMENDATIONS

QUESTIONNAIRE QUESTIONNAIRE

Delbecq’s nominal group technique: using
structured, small-group discussion to reach a
consensus.°° The moderator presents the
question of interest. Each group member writes
down their ideas separately. Then each person
shares their idea and the moderator writes them
on a group board. The group then discusses
each idea, revising them, and then votes on the
best one.

Charrette: collaborative planning process harnessing the talents of all interested parties.°”
Results in a master plan that represents transformative community change.

88
© 2022 Veritense™

Lean Six Sigma

As you read through this section, jot down your own study guide questions. What
information are main takeaways? Turn that answer around into a question.

Lean

“Lean” is a “systematic approach to eliminate activities that don’t add value to a
process”*® with the goal of high quality and customer satisfaction. Waste removal is a
continuous process. To use Lean, you have to define value — or what the customer's
perception of the product or service is and what they are willing to pay for. You can then
label work activities as value-added or non-value-added.

Lean evolved from the Toyota Production System and uses the 3M model of Muda,
Mura, and Muri to expose inefficient processes.*®

Muda is any activity that does not add value to a product or service, and is the
Japanese word for waste. There are 8 types of Muda: defects, overproduction,
waiting, non-utilized talents, transportation, inventory, motion, extra processing
— it spells DOWNTIME.

Mura is the concept of inconsistencies in business operations that results in
production fluctuations, and thus suboptimal resource utilization. Uneven
workloads, inventory accumulation, and waiting are examples of Muda that are
Mura. These are particularly applicable to a foodservice setting. What
foodservice system type has an uneven distribution of food preparation work?
What measures do we use to quantify the value of products in inventory?

Muri is the occurrence of dissatisfaction amongst people or unused resources,
such as machinery. Customers left waiting, ovens not being utilized, and staff
being over stressed are examples of Muri. Muri leads to Muda.

The 5 Principles of Lean are: 1) Identify your customers and what they value; 2) map
the value stream; 3) create flow to the customer; 4) establish pull based on customer
demand, and 5) seek continuous improvement.°9

Lean approaches use tools like the PDSA model, 5S (Sort, Set in Order, Shine,
Standardize, Sustain), and 8 wastes.

Six Sigma

The goal of Six Sigma is to create effective processes. Six Sigma itself is a problem-
solving methodology that uses data and the DMAIC framework — define, measure,
analyze, improve, and control. 5° If you’ve read through the previous sections in this
study guide then this framework should look familiar.

89
© 2022 Veritense™

e Define — Define the problem and objectives. This may be done with a problem
statement or goal statement, as well as listing out the scope of the project,
necessary resources, anticipated benefits, and the project timeline.

e Measure — What do we need to improve, and can we measure it? Identify and
measure baseline metrics to compare to final performance later.

e Analyze — Analyze the process and define the factors of influence. Conduct “root
cause analysis” with Pareto charts and fishbone diagrams. Verify and validate
root causes with statistical analyses.

e Improve — Identify and implement improvements. Form solutions and test them.
Do they eliminate the root causes? In this stage, you may run simulation studies
or pilot interventions.

e Control — Ensure that improvements will be sustained. Record the performance
of the solutions implemented in the Improve step, and put a control system in
place to monitor performance. Standardized processes using instructions and
verify estimated project benefits against anticipated benefits.

Lean Six Sigma

Lean Six Sigma combines the waste-reduction goals of Lean with the problem-solving
methodology of Six Sigma. First steps may use Lean to make a workplace efficient and
effective, using less technical tools like KAIZEN and workplace organization, followed
by Six Sigma statistical analyses to identify root causes for any problems that remain.©°

You can think of Lean Six Sigma in terms of 3 elements: customers, processes, and
employees.°° Customers are anyone who is consuming a business’ products or
services. Processes are core to Lean, with inefficient processes leading to poor quality
and profit losses. Finally, similar to how KAIZEN™ emphasizes involving managers and
workers in changes, successful Lean Six Sigma initiatives or infrastructure changes
require everyone in the organization to be involved and invested.

Now that you’ve read through this material, go online and search for videos on Lean Six
Sigma to help learn the information in a different way.

90

© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Part 3)

Answer these practice questions using the Study Smarter Method by Veritense ™ that you read about in
Chapter 2 and 3 of the Study Smarter Method for the RD-Exam section. Instead of answering these
questions using your memory and logic, use the study guide text and/or your own research to determine
which answer is correct (and why), and why the other answers are incorrect. Pay attention to the question
itself, and be sure you know what the question is asking. There are answers with explanations following.
If this is your first set of practice questions, go back and skim Chapters 2 and 3 in the Study Smarter
Method for the RD-Exam section to remind yourself of the types of questions and how to answer them.

1. Which of the following statements is TRUE regarding quality assurance (QA) programs?

a.
b.

QA is patient-centered and focuses on preventing problems

QA typically involves meeting established standards and individuals’ compliance
with standard procedures

QA is a continuous process that focuses on the organization’s systems

QA is dedicated to identifying problems and then studying the effectiveness of
the solution

2. Which performance improvement model is unique in its involvement of all employees in
making changes to the workplace environment?

a.
b.
c.
d.

FADE
Cal
PDSA
KAIZEN™

Write your own questions for the concepts of Total Quality Management, Continuous Quality
Improvement, the FADE model, the RUMBA model, and the IOM Framework for Health Care

Quality.

3. Which project management tool shows the frequency of costs with the cumulative
percentage of total costs?

a.
b.
c.
d.

Pareto chart

PERT chart

Cause and effect diagram
Fishbone diagram

4. Which project management approach uses the 3M model?

a.
b.
c.
d.

Lean Six Sigma

KAIZEN™

Total Quality Improvement
Continuous Quality Improvement

91
© 2022 Veritense™

5. Which of the following is not a pillar of the KAIZEN™ Change Model?
a. Daily KAIZEN
b. Breakthrough KAIZEN
c. Review KAIZEN
d. Support KAIZEN

6. Which of the following is not a principle of KAIZEN™?
a. Know your customer
b. Bethe change
c. Empower people
d. Goto gemba

7. What does gemba mean?
a. Change
b. For the better
c. Workplace
d. Inspiration

Practice Questions (Part 3) (Answers)

1. Which of the following statements is TRUE regarding quality assurance (QA) programs?
a. QAis patient-centered and focuses on preventing problems
b. QA typically involves meeting established standards and individuals’ compliance with
standard procedures
c. QA is acontinuous process that focuses on the organization’s systems
d. QA is dedicated to identifying problems and then studying the effectiveness of the
solution

Answer: B. quality assurance (QA) programs are typically individual-focused, rather than systems- or
process-focused, and involves measuring compliance against standards. You can think about QA in
contrast to quality improvement (QI). QA is often defensive or reactive, while QI is proactive and
continuous, focused on exploring the problem and potential solutions. QA is focused on determining if
employees or teams are adhering to standardized procedures and meeting benchmarks.

2. Which performance improvement model is unique in its involvement of all employees in making
changes to the workplace environment?

a. FADE

b. CQI

c. PDSA

d. KAIZEN™

Answer: D. The concept of KAIZEN™ is a Japanese business philosophy regarding the processes that
continuously improve operations and involve all employees. TQM, or total quality management, is a
company culture/attitude that also emphasize involving all employees in all departments. The FADE
model incorporates 4 key aspects of effective quality improvement initiatives: Considers both systems and
processes, focuses on patients, focuses on being part of the team, and Focuses on the use of data.
FADE stands for Focus, Analyze, Develop, Execute. CQI, or Continuous Quality Improvement, is an

92
© 2022 Veritense™

ongoing cycle of collecting data and using the data to make decisions for gradual and continuous
improvement to programs and processes. Kaizen is a type of CQI method. The PDSA cycle is a 4-stage
problem-solving model used to carry out change to improve a process and stands for plan, do, study, act.

3. Which project management tool shows the frequency of costs with the cumulative percentage of
total costs?
a. Pareto chart
b. PERT chart
c. Cause and effect diagram
d. Fishbone diagram

Answer: A. The Pareto chart involves a bar graph of occurrences or costs in descending order for one y-
axis and the cumulative percentage of total costs in line graph form using the other y-axis. A PERT chart
is a project management evaluation tool used for effective planning by estimating the amount of time
needed to complete each task and determining the critical path. A cause-and-effect diagram, or a
fishbone diagram, involves writing down the problem and then breaking down major factors into causes
and subcauses.

4. Which project management approach uses the 3M model?
a. Lean Six Sigma
b. KAIZEN™
c. Total Quality Improvement
d. Continuous Quality Improvement

Answer: A. Lean Six Sigma combines the waste-reduction goals of Lean with the problem-solving
methods of Six Sigma. The goal of lean is to eliminate activities that don’t add value to a process, and
uses the 3M model of Muda (8 types of waste), Mura, and Muri. What are Muda, Mura, and Muri? What
are the 5 principles of Lean? What tools are used in Lean? The goal of Six Sigma is to create effective
processes and uses the DMAIC framework (what does DMAIC stand for?) First steps may use Lean to
make a workplace efficient and effective, using less technical tools like KAIZEN and workplace
organization, followed by Six Sigma statistical analyses to identify root causes for any problems that
remain. The concept of KAIZEN™ is a Japanese business philosophy regarding the processes that
continuously improve operations and involve all employees. TQM, or total quality management, is a
company culture/attitude that also emphasize involving all employees in all departments. CQI, or
Continuous Quality Improvement, is an ongoing cycle of collecting data and using the data to make
decisions for gradual and continuous improvement to programs and processes.

5. Which of the following is not a pillar of the KAIZEN™ Change Model?
a. Daily KAIZEN
b. Breakthrough KAIZEN
c. Review KAIZEN
d. Support KAIZEN

Answer: C. The 4 pillars of the KAIZEN Change Model are 1) daily KAIZEN™, 2) breakthrough
KAIZEN™, 3) leaders KAIZEN™, and 4) support KAIZEN™.

6. Which of the following is not a principle of KAIZEN™?
a. Know your customer
b. Be the change
c. Empower people
d. Goto gemba

93
© 2022 Veritense™

Answer: B. The idea of “be the change” is in line with the KAIZEN Guiding Principles — take action to
correct root causes of problems and KAIZEN is everybody’s responsibility, but is not a principle in itself.
The 5 principles of KAIZEN™ are: 1) know your customer, 2) let it flow, 3) go to gemba, 4) empower
people, 5) be transparent.

7. What does gemba mean?
a. Change
b. For the better
c. Workplace
d. Inspiration

Answer: C. Gemba refers to workplace and “go to gemba’” is a principle of the continuous improvement
model, KAIZEN™. “Go to Gemba” encourages managers to go to where the action is happening so that
they can observe and experience the process that they are suggesting changes for.

References

1 Gregoire MB, Spears MC. Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach. 9th ed. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson; 2016.

? Gould RA, Canter DD. Management matters. J Am Diet Assoc. 2008;108(11):1834-1836.

3 Keiser J, DeMicco FJ. Contemporary Management Theory: Controlling and Analyzing Costs in Foodservice
Operations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall; 2000:225.

4 Emotional Intelligence. Psychology Today. htios:/Awww.psychologytoday.com/us/basics/emotional-intelligence
Accessed 18 Mar 2022.

5 The Big Five Healthcare Accreditation Organizations — Side by Side Comparison. BHM Healthcare Solutions.

https ://ohmpc.com/calltoaction/accreditation-comparison-cta/Accreditation-Comparison-Tool.pdf Accessed 17 Nov
2021.

® Accreditation of Medicare Certified Providers and Suppliers. CMS. hitps://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Provider-
Enrollment-and-Certification/SurveyCertificationGenInfo/Accreditation-of-Medicare-Certified-Providers-and-Suppliers
Accessed 17 Nov 2021

7 Meldi D, Rhoades F, and Gippe A. The Big Three: A Side by Side Matrix Comparing Hospital Accrediting Agencies.
Synergy. Jan/Feb 2009.
https:/Avww.namss.org/Portals/0/Regulatory/The%20Big%20Three%20A%20Side%20by%20Side%20Matrix%20Co
mparing%20Hospital%20Accrediting%20Agencies.pdf Accessed 17 Nov 2021.

8 About NCQA. NCQA. hitps://www.ncqga.org/about-ncga/ Accessed 18 Mar 2022.

° Hospital (Accrediting Organizations). Louisiana Department of Health. https://idh.la.gov/page/286 Accessed 17 Nov
2021.

10 Defining the PCMH. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.

https ://www.ahrg.gov/ncepcr/tools/pcmh/defining/index.htm| Accessed 18 Mar 2022.

11 Value-Based Care is the Future of Healthcare. Enlace Health. hitps://www.enlacehealth.com/value-based-care-is-
the-future-of-healthcare-here-is-its-origin-story/ Accessed 18 Mar 2022.

12 Overview of Select Alternative Payment Models. CMS. htips://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/overview-
select-alternative-payment-models Accessed 18 Mar 2022.

13 All About Unions. Workplace Fairness. hitps://www.workplacefairness.org/labor-unions Accessed 6 May 2021.

14 At-Will Employment. Workplace Fairness. https:/Awww.workplacefairness.org/at-will-employment Accessed 6 May
2021.

15 1974 Health Care Amendments. National Labor Relations Board. httos://www.nlrb.gov/about-nlrb/who-we-are/our-
history/1974-health-care-amendments Accessed 6 May 2021

94
© 2022 Veritense™

16 Feheley, LF. Amendments to the National Labor Relations Act: Health Care Institutions. Ohio State Law Journal.
1975. 36 (2): 235-298. htips://kb.osu.edu/bitstream/handle/1811/69611/OSLJ_V36N2_0235.pdf Accessed 6 May
2021.

17 1947 Taft-Harley Substantive Provisions. National Labor Relations Board. htips://www.nlrb.gov/about-nlrb/who-we-
are/our-history/1947-taft-hartley-substantive-provisions Accessed 6 May 2021.

18 41959 Landrum-Griffin Act. National Labor Relations Board. hitos://www.nlrb.gov/about-nlrb/who-we-are/our-
history/1959-landrum-griffin-act Accessed 6 May 2021.

19 What are bargaining units? USA Jobs. hitps://Awww.usajobs.gov/Help/faq/job-announcement/bargaining-units/
Accessed 6 May 2021.

20 The Truth About Grievance Procedures. IBEW 1049. hitps://ibew1049.org/organize/truth-about-grievance-
procedures Accessed 6 May 2021.

21 Handy Reference Guide to the Fair Labor Standards Act. Wage and Hour Division. US Department of Labor.

https ://Awww.dol.gov/agencies/whd/compliance-assistance/handy-reference-quide-flsa Accessed 6 May 2021.

22 Civil Rights Act of 1964. HISTORY. Published 4 Jan 2010. Updated 25 Jan 2021.

https ://www.history.com/topics/black-history/civil-rights-act Accessed 6 May 2021.

?3 Lafer G and Loustaunau L. Fear at work. Economic Policy Institute. 2020. https://www.epi.org/publication/fear-at-
work-how-employers-scare-workers-out-of-unionizing/ Accessed 6 May 2021.

24 Unfair Labor Practices. Nolo. https:/Avww.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/unfair-labor-practices.html Accessed 6 May
2021.

25 Gitman LJ, McDaniel C, Shah A, Reece M, Koffel L, Talsma B, and Hyatt JC. Introduction to Business. 2018.
https ://opentextbc.ca/businessopenstax/chapter/managerial-roles/ Accessed 21 Jan 2021.

6 Types of Leaders. Boundless Management. Lumen Learning. https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-
management/chapter/types-of-leaders/ Accessed 21 Jan 2021.

27 Kuhnert KW and Lewis P. Transactional and Transformational Leadership: A Constructive/Developmental Analysis.
Academy of Management Review. 1987. 12(4):648-657. https://bit.ly/301 YMn3

8 Contingency Approach. Boundless Management. Lumen Learning. https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-
management/chapter/contingency-approach/ Accessed 21 Jan 2021.

2° Cherry K. The Situational Theory of Leadership. 13 Nov 2020. httos://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-the-
situational-theory-of-leadership-2795321 Accessed 21 Jan 2021.

80 Hersey-Blanchard Situational Leadership Theory. Leadership Central. https://www.leadership-
central.com/situational-leadership-theory.himl Accessed 21 Jan 2021.

31 Hersey-Blanchard Situational Leadership Theory. Free Management E-Books. htip://www.free-management-
ebooks.com/faqid/ieadtheory-06.htm Accessed 21 Jan 2021.

32 Hudson NR. Management Practices in Dietetics. 3rd ed. San Diego, CA: Cognella Academic Publishing; 2013

38 Britannica, The Editors of Encyclopedia. "Taylorism". Encyclopedia Britannica, 15 Nov. 2018,
https:/Awww.britannica.com/science/Taylorism. Accessed 21 January 2021.

34 Management and Communication. Boundless Management. Lumen Learning.
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-management/chapter/management-and-communication/ Accessed 21
Jan 2021.

35 Payne-Palacio J, Theis M. Foodservice Management Principles and Practice. 12th ed. Upper Saddle River, Nu:
Prentice Hall; 2012.

36 Quchi’s Theory Z. Module 10: Motivating Employees. Introduction to Business. Lumen Learning.

https ://courses.lumenlearning.com/wmintrobusiness/chapter/reading-theory-z/ Accessed 21 January 2021.

87 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization. Principles of Accounting, Volume 2: Managerial Accounting.

https ://opentextbc.ca/principlesofaccountingv2openstax/chapter/differentiate-between-centralized-and-decentralized-
management/ Accessed 21 Jan 2021.

38 Degree of Centralization. Introduction to Business. htios://opentextbc.ca/businessopenstax/chapter/degree-of-
centralization/ Accessed 21 Jan 2021.

39 Common Organizational Structures. Boundless Management. https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-
management/chapter/common-organizational-structures/ Accessed 21 Jan 2021.

40 Marketing Mix Introduction. Introduction to Business.

https://biz. libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Business/Introductory_Business/Book%3A_Introduction_to_Business_(Lumen)/
13%3A_ Marketing Function/13.04%3A Marketing Mlx Introduction Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

41 US Framework and VALS™ Types. Strategic Business Insights.
http://www.strategicbusinessinsights.com/vals/ustypes.shitml Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

42 Stein K. Moving cultural competency from abstract to act. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010; 110(2): 180-187.

43 3 Things to Know about Cultural Humility. University of Texas. htips://nogg.utexas.edu/3-things-to-know-cultural-
humility Accessed 18 Mar 2022.

44 Khan, S. Cultural Humility vs Cultural Competence — and Why Providers Need Both. Health City - BMC. 9
https://healthcity.bmc.org/policy-and-industry/cultural-humility-vs-cultural-competence-providers-need-both Access?
18 Mar 2022.

© 2022 Veritense™

45 Introduction to Quality Improvement and the FOCUS-PDSA Model. Quality Improvement: An ACC Clinical Toolkit.
https://cvquality.acc.org/docs/default-source/qi-toolkit/01_introtogiandthefocus_pdsamodel_12-10-
13new.pdf?sivrsn=44478ibf 2 Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

46 What is Total Quality Management (TQM)? ASQ. hitps://asq.org/quality-resources/total-quality-management
Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

47 Quality Assurance and Quality Improvement. SANE Program Development and Operation Guide. Office for Victims
of Crime. Office of Justice Programs. hitos://www.ovcttac.gov/sanequide/maintaining-a-quality-program/quality-
assurance-and-quality-improvement/ Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

48 Quality Assurance and Quality Improvement. SANE Program Development and Operation Guide. Office for Victims
of Crime. Office of Justice Programs. hitos://www.ovcttac.gov/sanequide/maintaining-a-quality-program/quality-
assurance-and-quality-improvement/ Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

49 O'Donnell B, Gupta V. Continuous Quality Improvement. [Updated 2020 Jun 5]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure
Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 Jan-. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/books/NBK559239/

50 What is Kaizen? Kaizen Institute. https://Awww.kaizen.com/what-is-kaizen.html Accessed 17 Nov 2021

51 KAIZEN Guiding Principles. Kaizen Institute. www.kaizen.com. Accessed 17 Nov 2021.

52 Quality Improvement. US Department of Health and Human Services Health Resources and Services
Administration, April 2011. https://www.hrsa.gov/sites/default/files/quality/toolbox/pdis/qualityimprovement.pdf
Accessed 22 Jan 2021.,

58 Six Sigma DMAIC Process — Define Phase — Six Sigma Project Charter. https://www.sixsigma-
institute.org/Six_Sigma_DMAIC_Process_ Define Phase _Six_Sigma_Project_Charter.pbhp Accessed 22 Jan 2021.
54 Fishbone Diagram. ASQ. htips://asq.org/quality-resources/fishbone Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

55 Delphi Method. RAND Corporation. https://www.rand.org/topics/delphi-method.html Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

56 Gaining Consensus Among Stakeholders Through the Nominal Group Technique. Centers for Disease Prevention
and Control. Evaluation Briefs. No 7. Updated 2018 Aug. htips://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/evaluation/pdf/brief7.pdf
Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

57 Willis D. Are Charrettes Old School? Harvard Design Magazine. 33 (2).

http://www. harvarddesignmagazine.org/issues/33/are-charrettes-old-school Accessed 22 Jan 2021.

58 A Brief Introduction to Lean, Six Sigma, and Lean Six Sigma. Grey Campus.
https:/Awww.greycampus.com/blog/quality-management/a-brief-introduction-to-lean-and-six-sigma-and-lean-six-sigma

Accessed 17 Nov 2021.

59 Back to the Basics: 5 Principles of Lean. Continuous Improvement Blog. Michigan Tech.
https://ologs.mtu.edu/improvement/2014/01/08/back-to-the-basics-5-principles-of-lean/ Accessed 17 Nov 2021
60 What is Six Sigma? ASQ. htips://asg.org/quality-resources/six-sigma Accessed 17 Nov 2021.

96
