Nutrition Counseling & Education

@@ ALLACCESS
@ DIETETICS

Given by Zak Kaesberg, MS, RDN, LDN

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/pass-class

Agenda

Basics of Education
Methods of Communication
Cultural Competence/Communication
Nutrition Education
o Theories of Learned Behavior
Nutrition Counseling
o Motivational Interviewing and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy

Formative vs. Summative Evaluations

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Basics of Education

Education method in which the learner is dependent on
> Pedagogy the teacher for guidance, evaluation, and acquisition of
knowledge. Ex: RD provides children with examples of

how to eat healthy.

The methods and approaches used in adult education
and is directed towards: Co And ragOgY

1. Need to know info

2.  Self-directed learning

3. Expanding experiences and Readiness to learn

4. Problem-centered

5. Internal motivations

self-actualization, gaining experience, and
problem-solving.
Ex: RD assists adult client in identifying healthy
eating strategy that works for him.

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
¢,__Teachtng Different Populations

Middle and Upper Income GOAL oriented; if they can't
relate = waste of time

Lower Income Interested in costs
Very poor Short-term planners

Adolescents Consider peer pressure, relate
to their interests

Elderly Decreased attention span;
Short is best

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics coms

Methods of Communication

Written

More formal More personal
Ex: Emails, texting, pamphlets, Encourages your participants
posters, handouts to PARTICIPATE!
Low literacy participants: 6th Barrier: listening...
grade level Ex: talking on TV, in person
High literacy/general presentation, podcast, radio
participants: 8th grade level show
How to test readability of

@ Material: SMOG test

Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Methods of Communication

Non-Verbal

Personal

e Positive rather than negative

e Becooperative instead of
authoritarian

e Beempathetic instead of
neutral

e How to test readability of

material: SMOG test

Clothing, dress, appearance
Demeanor

Eye contact, body position
Practitioner should maintain
orofessional non-verbal
communication and interpret
the client as well

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Effectiue Communication

Remember!

Effective and competent communication requires:
e The message be understood

e Achieves intended effect

e Ethical and truthful

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Methods of Communication

Barriers include:
Room
Interruptions
Anxiety, fear,
apprehension

Sender Receiver

Receiver

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Misunderstanding
Cultural
differences
Language barrier

Cultural Communication

The way you communicate depends on who you are talking to / what culture they are from. For
example, here is what different types of kinesics (physical communication) mean in some cultures:

Good posture and averting eyes = | Sign of respect
Arms folded on desk = | Dislike/avoidance

You even have to consider proxemics/Spatial relationships (amount of space between people
when talking), the rate/pitch/volume of your voice (paralinguistic), eye contact,
and the way you greet people.

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Cultural Communication

Spatial Relationships

WaidiaateleswAelatsm Less than 18 inches
pyevaxelar-|Aelatem 1S inches to 4 feet

Sele-lwAelaiom 4 feet to 12 feet
PUleiiewfelaiem Creater than 12 feet

The appropriate zone will vary
depending on the culture/individual!

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Cultural Competence

Definition: “the ability to understand, appreciate and interact with people
from cultures or belief systems different from one's own” (APA)

Once we develop cultural competence, we know how to properly

address individuals in different cultures, which helps increase
Satisfaction and adherence to recommendations

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
ETHNIC Model

ee
What are others in your culture doing about this disease?
ee | pestis

What feedback do you have on this intervention?
Collaboration Working with other health care professionals to achieve outcomes.

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Campinha Bacote Model

Awareness- Ask questions about values; understanding that there are other
cultures.

Knowledge- specifics of a culture such as diet, beliefs, familial
relationships

tT * Skill- applying and collecting key information to conduct
an effective assessment.
(08) Desire- the want to engage with others cultures
Encounter- Meeting with the client, or traveling and experiencing another culture.

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Nutrition Education

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Goals us. Objectives

Goals
e Anachievable outcome that is
broad and long-term

Example:
Decrease rates of constipation in the

elderly at Johnson ALF

Objectives

Defines measurable actions in the
short term to achieve the overall goal
S.M.A.R.T. goal:

o Specific, measurable, achievable,
relevant, and time-bound
Example:
At the end of session 1, participants
will be able to list 5 foods that are
high in insoluble fiber with >80%
accuracy

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Practice Question

The SMOG formula determines

The readability level of written materials

The cultural competence of written materials
Aand B

None of the above

OUOWP

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Theortes of learned
behautor/education

Educational Theoru: Transtheoretical Stages of Change Model

Precontemplation

Contemplation

Maintenance

=
S
A.
M

Unaware or not interested in making
a change

Aware they need to make changes
NO COMMITMENT TO CHANGE

Intends to take action in the next 30
days

Implementing the plan of action for
up to 6 months

Maintaining healthy habit for 6
months or more

Consciousness raising
Assess knowledge
Increase self-awareness
Risks vs. Benefits

Assess knowledge
Assess thoughts/feelings
Increase pros

Decrease cons

Self-efficacy
Decision-making
Plan goals

Control stimulus
Reinforcement
Self-management

Coping responses
Relapse prevention

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Educational Theory: Operant us. Classical Conditioning

Operant
Conditioning

Classical
Conditioning

The idea that learning isa
function of change in overt
behavior, and changes In
behavior are the result of an
individual's response to
events in the environment
If stimulus is negative =
behavior decreases

If stimulus is positive =
behavior increases

Two stimuli are paired
together for a number of
trials until a response is
elicited

“My morning alarm signals
that | need to go workout”

“Classical music” 9 think
of instruments 2° think of
a bell

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Educational Theory: Health Beltef Model

Perceived Susceptibility

“Since | am Native American, | am more likely to have Diabetes”

Perceived Severity

“Diabetes can put me at greater risk for heart disease”

Perceived Benefit

“If | control my diabetes, | will feel better”

Perceived Barriers

‘| don’t have enough family support to take care of my diabetes”

Self-Efficacy

“I can successfully check my blood sugar levels after | eat”

Cues to Action

“I can set an alarm on my phone to remind me to exercis

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Practice Question

Harry tells the RDN: “I Know | have a heart issue and should eat
healthier, but | don't really intend to do much about It anytime

SOON.”

A. Pre-contemplation
B. Contemplation

C. Preparation

D. Action

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Practice Question

After attending a nutrition education session on nutrition for
osteoporosis, a ‘70-year-old female client decides she wants to
start eating more calcium-rich foods because she has Identified
herself as being at risk. What component of the Health Belief
Model has triggered her behavior change?

A. Perceived benefit

B. Perceived barrier

C. Perceived susceptibility

D. Self-efficacy

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Practice Question

Carlos is preparing steaks for his family. Last time he grilled out,
he ended up sick with food poisoning from not checking the
temperature of the steak before serving. Carlos chooses to
check the temperature because of this experience. This is
Known as:

A. Classical conditioning
B. Operant conditioning
C. Perceived benefit

D. Modeling

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Nutrition Counseling

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Counseling Steps

Introduce yourself

Establish Rapport:
e Weather
e Sports
e Local events

1. Opening

Discuss purpose

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Counseling Steps

2. Exploration
most of the time!
Assessment
Know the difference between threatening/attacking

primary (introduce new topics) and
secondary (follow up) questions

LISTEN throughout the
interview; note nonverbal

No leadin uestions/questions that
gq /q AUGE

reveal your bias (are you eating your 5
portions of f/v per day?)

BEST types of questions: “Tell me about...”

Example: Don't ask “do you exercise?” but

ask “tell me about your relationship with
exercise...”

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Clarification

Reflective Listening

Legitimation

Feedback

Evaluative Response

Hostile

Reassuring

Probing

Understanding

Affirmation

Self-Disclosure

Listening R
Asking a question after an ambiguous message “What do you mean by...?” “Did | hear you correctly when you said...”

Paraphrasing what was just said; focused on feelings of other person “So you feel...” “It sounds like you...” “You're wondering if...” “For you it's like...”

Acknowledges that what they feel is legitimate “You have a right to feel upset, anybody would!”

“Testing” your client - lets you know what they know and that they understand what you are telling them “Tell me again, what are 2 foods that
are high in fiber?”

mus

When you offer advice but don’t solve the problem - seldom helpful “If you eat too much ice cream, you should stop buying it” “if you eat poorly
out, stop going to restaurants”

Antagnozies/humiliates the client “Maybe you are not losing weight because you are not trying hard enough”

Does not work!! “Everything will be okay” “Don’t worry about that”

Encourages conversation, makes clients think. “Can you tell me more about that?” “Why do you think that?” “What would happen if...”

Recreating person’s message in your frame of reference; putting yourself in their shoes “You seem to be saying you are feeling...”

“Good job!” “Great, that shows you are dedicated!”
“This happened to me, too!”

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Counseling Steps

Express appreciation

Summarize points
and goals

4. Closing

Declare completion

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Practice Question

An RD provides medical nutrition therapy to a Latin client on dialysis
with hyperkalemia, Stella. When Stella discloses she’s angry because a
low-potassium diet limits her ability to eat copious amounts of her
favorite cultural fruits, the RD responds, “What | hear you saying Is that
limiting the amount of guava, bananas, and mangos you can eat daily
makes you mad.” This is an example of what type of listening
response?

Legitimation

Probing

Reflective Listening

Affirmation C

OOWP>

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Practice Question

A patient reveals to the RDN that he Is having trouble eating
whole grains because he dislikes the taste. The RDN responds,
“| also had this problem when | started eating whole grain
pasta!” This is an example of what listening response?
Legitimation

Reassuring

Self-disclosure

Affirmation

OUOWP

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Cognitive Behauioral Therapy (CBT)

Thoughts

e Removing negative self-talk and eliciting change talk

e Identifying behaviors and thoughts that are negative and applying
strategies to change those

e From “| can’t do it” to “] want to control my health to feel better!”

e NO ROOM for negativity!!!

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Motivational Interutewing (MI)

e Goal-oriented communication style
e Idea is to increase motivation and readiness change in

clients/patients, allowing them to evoke a desire to change on their
own

e Client-centered
e Does NOT give advice to the client - decisions are left up to them!

—) Improves change
initiative

The focus is CLIENT —> Maximizes strengths

AUTONOMY

Reduces resistance
and ambivalence

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics. com/oass-class

Motivational Interutewing (MI)

“AMANDA SINGS ROCK EVERY DAY”
Arwou ARGUMENTS: Avoid Confrontation

S Reinforce hope and optimism in the patient;

UPPORT SELF-EFFICACY: promote belief in their ability to do the skill
needed

: 2 OLL WITH RESISTANCE: Acknowledge reluctance to change
“You are not happy to be here today”

—_——— EMPATHY: Being compassionate, accepting

Help clients see difference between their values and

EVE LOP DISCREPAN CY: their behaviors “you want to balance your blood sugar,

but you need to drink juice with every meal”
Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Motivational Interutewing (MI)

STEPS: EFEP

e “What” phase. Finding a clear direction/goal when it’s not clear from the
beginning. What is the particular goal for change in this client? What is the
target behavior?

e “Why” phase. Evoke a person’s own motivations to change, and reinforce it to

help build their motivation for change around the focused target behavior.
e Elicit “change talk” = any speech that favors movement toward change. Try
to keep them away from “sustain talk” (talking about why they can’t change)

e “How” phase. Developing a commitment to change and formulating a specific
olan of action

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

Motivational Interuiewing (MI)

What is something

| guess |
could start
bringing a
water
bottle with
me to
work...

simple you could see
yourself doing to start
optimizing your
hydration?

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class

-Client
Social Cognitive Theory

Modeling: Observing behaviors and behaving based on what you
see others doing. Helps determine human behaviors.

Cognitive Factors

e Knowledge

e Expectation
e Attitudes

Environment
Factors
e Social Norm
e Community
e Influence
on others

Behavior Factors
ee Skill

e Practice

e Self-Efficacy

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
5.
6.

7,

Steps to Effective Education

Assessing learning needs (pre assessment)

Writing feasible and measurable performance objectives
Determining educational content and Learning Domain
a. Cognitive (Knowledge)

b. Affective (Attitudes)

c. Psychomotor (Skills)

Select methods, techniques, materials and resources for the
individual or group

Implementing the intervention

Evaluate progress and outcomes

Document results and outcomes of the education

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Evaluating your Education

Formative Evaluation

e Done BEFORE or DURING the course
of education
e Identifies learner misconceptions,
struggles, and learning gaps DURING
the educational process

Examples:
Focus Group

Pilot Test
Pre-Test
Quizzes

Summative Evaluation

e Done at the END of your teaching
e Tosee if you accomplished your
goals/objectives
e Did you achieve what you set out to
do?

Examples:
Post-Test

End of semester exam

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Practice Question

During a nutrition counseling session with a client, the client
States: “As much as | would like to bring a healthy lunch with
me to work, | can’t because | don’t have time to cook.” This is an
example otf:

Self-efficacy

Change talk

Sustain talk

Cues to action

OUOWP

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Practice Question

A dietitian is implementing a 6 session program at the local
YMCA for older adults about nutrition for osteoporosis. Which of
the following is NOT considered a formative evaluation?

A take home quiz provided to participants after session 3

A quiz provided to participants after session 6

A quiz provided to participants before session 1

Asking participants in the middle of the class to repeat what
the dietitian just taught

OUOWP

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
Practice Question

A client explains to the dietitian “| Know my blood sugar is high,
but this is not the right moment to make changes In my life.”
The RDN responds by asking, “What are the advantages and
disadvantages of making changes now?” What principle of
motivational interviewing Is this?
A. Develop discrepancy

B. Roll with resistance

C. Avoid arguments

D. Support self-efficacy

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
You got this, future dietitian!

ALL ACCESS

) DIETETICS

Copyright All Access Dietetics 2024 - Pass Class Review Session Recordings - www.allaccessdietetics.com/oass-class
