RESEARCH CONCEPTS

FOR THE REGISTERED DIETITIAN NUTRITIONIST EXAMINATION

a VERITENSE™ product

WRITTEN BY
Bailey DeBarmore, PhD MHS RDN LDN
Creator of the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™

Version: June 1, 2022

© 2022 Veritense™

Table of Contents

TOIrMS Of USC 0.0... eeeceeccceceeeeeeeenneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeuaaeeeeeeeeeseeeeseaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeseneceaaeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeneeees 3
Study DeSIQNS .............cccccccee eee eeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaeeeeeseeeeeeneceaeaeeeeseeeeeeneeea 4
1O7e)| (=To) (ale Ne [= C- ee eer ree 4
Observational Studies.............cccccccceceecceeteeseeeeeeeeeeeeaseeeeeaaeaaaeaseeaeaaaesaaeeaeeaseaeeeaaseesaaanaaea 4
Experimental Studies ..............:ccccccccccesssseeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeseeeeeeesseeeeeeeeeess 6
Study Guide QueSTIONS ......... eee eee e cece cece eee eeeeeeeeeeseaaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeenceaaaaeeeeeeeeseeeeeeneeees 9
Study Guide Questions (ANSWETS)............:::cccceceeeeeeeseeeeseeeeeeeeeeesseeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeenes 10
Other Study De@SIQNS................ccccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaes 11
Recruitment Strategies .......... cece cececeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeseeeeeeeeenaaeeeeeeeaeeeseeseeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaas 14
Food Science De@SIQNS..............ccceceeeeceeesnee cece eeeeseeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeanaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneaeeeeees 15
Quality Of EViId@NCe 00.0.2... ccc cece ceeeeeeeenaeeeeeneeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeaeeeseaaeessenaeeeseeaeesseeeeesas 16
Quantitative verSUS Qualitative ......... cece cece ee ceeeecenneeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaeeeees 20
QUANTITATIVE oe ccc cc cccteeeeeeseeeeeeeseeaeeeeesecaeeeeceesaueeeecceeeuaeeeseeaueeeseeeceeseeseeseeeaeeeees 20
QUaAIItATIVE 2... eee cece ee eeeeeceeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeueeeeeeseaeeeeseeeaaeeeesseaeeeseeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 23
Epidemiology Methods and Biostatistics «2.0.0.2... ccc cece eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeee 25
VaAliGity o.oo... e cece cece ccc ceceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeueeeeceasaeeeeeseaaeeeecauseeesaasaaueaasaaaaaaeeaaaaaeas 25
Reliability ......0......cccccecccsssecceecessseeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeueeeeeeseeeeesceeeaaeeseceeueeeseeseaeeeeecesseaeeeeeeeses 25
Bias ANd ErrOr...........eececcceeeseceeeeeeeeeeeenenneaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesaaaeeeeeeeeeeeseeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeseneeaaeeeees 26
ACCUracy ANC PFeCiSiON ..............ccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaeeeeeseeeeeeseenaaeeeeeeeeeeey 29
Sensitivity and Specificity 2.0.0.0... e cece eeeeeeeeeeaaeaeeeeeeeeseeeeeeaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaes 30
Positive Predictive and Negative Predictive Value .0.............ceeeccecceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenneneeeeees 31
Study Guide QUESTIONS... eee eee ccceteee cece eee eeeeeeenaaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeneeaaes 32
Study Guide Questions (ANSWETS)...........c:::cccceceeeeeeesesssseeeaeeeeeeesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeenes 34
Prevalence and INCIGONCE .............cecececeeeee cece eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeaaaeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeaaaeeeees 36
Morbidity and Mortality Rates 2.0.00... cece ee eeeeeenneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseneaeeeeees 40
Odds RattiOS ......... cece cece cece ceecceeeeeeeeeeeeeenaaaaeaeeeeeeeeseeeeeeaaaaeeeeeesseeseeecaeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeaaes 41
Mean, Median, Mode.............cc.ccccccsseeccceeccccueceuececceucecceeeceueeeseueeeseeeceuueeeseeeeeseeseeees 43
Standard deviation ...............cccccceeeceeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenecaaeaeeeeeeeeeeeseeenaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaes 45
Practice QUESTIONS 2.0.0... ccc cece cceeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeesseeeeeeeeueeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeees 46
Practice Questions (ANSWETS) ............:cccceeecceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeseeaaeeeeeeeeeeey 48

Research Concepts 2
© 2022 Veritense™

Terms of use

Bailey DeBarmore is the creator and sole owner of the exclusive copyright to this study
resource.

This publication may not be shared physically or electronically with anyone, manipulated,
copied, reprinted and sold, altered, or reproduced in any form or by any means without
requesting further permission from the owner, Bailey DeBarmore.

This book is for personal use only by a single individual. It should not be distributed to a dietetic
internship class or otherwise used for academic purposes without discussing terms of use with
the owner. By purchasing this item, you agree to the Terms of Use outlined herein.

To inquire about further permissions for this document, including access for groups such as
dietetic internship classes or graduate courses, contact the owner to learn about your options.

Research Concepts 3
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Designs
Collecting data
How is research data collected? There are several ways.

e Use existing data — analyze NHANES or BRFSS data

e Conduct a survey — ask a sample of the population your questions

e Use acensus — ask every individual in your population your questions

e Design an experiment — have half of the GI surgery patients receive trophic EN and the
other half remain NPO for 2 weeks

e Simulate data — use a computer model to replicate the conditions of a process or
situation, like simulating lung cancer rates in 20 years if 80% of current high schoolers
use e-cigarettes versus 5% use e-cigarettes

Is there a best way to collect data? How data is collected relates closely to study designs, which
are divided broadly into observational studies and experimental studies.

Observational Studies

In observational studies, the researcher doesn’t intervene or manipulate the conditions, they just
gather information. Thus, the results are measures of association or correlation, not causation.

Prospective studies, like the Framingham Heart Follow over time
Study, have an established protocol where all Identify outcome
participants attend clinic visits in the same way, O x
answer the same surveys, and have the same

tests done. However, the researchers do not Study start

manipulate anything, they just collect data and Measure exposure

assess their observations. Prospective studies essentially, “watch and wait” for outcomes to
develop and measure markers and conditions along the way, such as subclinical manifestations
of heart disease before a heart attack. The key with prospective studies is that the outcome is
measured after the exposure.

Example: Healthy Eating Index and Ischemic Stroke

In a large cohort study constructed in 1980, a group of 20,000 adults aged 30 — 80 were recruited and
attended regular clinic visits every 5 years. Between Clinic visits, study staff contacted participants via
telephone. At every 5-year clinic visit, participants completed a food frequency questionnaire. Using this
data, study investigators studied the association between the Healthy Eating Index from the dietary data
and the risk of hospitalization from ischemic stroke, beginning with a baseline in 1980 and following
participants through 2010.

Why is this study prospective?

Research Concepts 4
© 2022 Veritense™

Retrospective studies can be

constructed from non-research data or

using ancillary studies where the outcome

is measured before the exposure because ©

you are looking backwards in time. These Go backwards in
retrospective cohorts can be constructed time to measure
from electronic health records by exposure
identifying a certain group of persons that

meet your criteria and cataloguing their data. It is retrospective because all of the data has
already been collected. Limitations lie in the type and quality of data collected as the data was
not intended for research, or if it was, the data was not intended for the present research
question. Retrospective studies, like case-control studies, can be embedded within cohort
studies or can be done via secondary data analysis. These studies may be subject to recall
bias, where the occurrence of the outcome affects reporting of the exposure.

Identify outcome

x

Example: Food-borne illness infection at school picnic

The local health department is called in to investigate an outbreak of food-borne illness among students,
teachers, and parents who attended a school picnic. Because the investigators knew who had been ill
and who had not, they are measuring the outcome first and go backwards to measure exposure, thus, it is
retrospective. Because the investigators have a discrete population — attendees at the picnic — itis a
cohort study.

Observational study designs include cross-sectional studies, case-control studies, and cohort
studies.

In cross-sectional studies, you measure the exposure and outcome at the same time, like a
snapshot in time. Surveys are often cross-sectional, such as NHANES and BRFSS. Cross-
sectional studies are efficient and work well when we are starting to explore an issue.

In case-control studies, you measure the outcome at the start of the study and go backwards
to measure the exposure. For example, if you are interested in looking at prenatal exposures in
mothers with premature born children, you could identify all the mother-child dyads in the NICU
at your hospital, and then interview the mothers about their behaviors during pregnancy. An
advantage of case-control studies is that you can look at multiple exposures or risk factors, and
this design is efficient for rare conditions. However, information that relies on memory may be
subject to recall bias and it can be difficult to find a suitable control group for some conditions.

In cohort studies, the exposure is measured before the outcome develops. Cohort studies can
be prospective, where you recruit participants and follow them over time, or retrospective, using
existing data where the exposure was still measured prior to the outcome. Some advantages
include standardized measurement of variables and cheaper than randomized trials.
Disadvantages include lack of randomization and the length of time often required to observe
participants prior to developing the outcome.

Cohort is a general term — you might hear about “birth cohorts”, or everyone who graduated at
the same time as you in college could be considered a cohort.

Research Concepts 5
© 2022 Veritense™

Example: ICU Readmission after Cardiac Surgery

Investigators want to study the predictors of ICU readmission during a single hospital stay following
cardiac surgery. They identify patients who underwent cardiac surgery from January to December of 2010
and were admitted to the ICU at least once. Cases are those that were readmitted to the ICU following
the initial |CU stay. Controls were those not readmitted to the ICU (one ICU stay during the cardiac
surgery-related hospitalization). Example based on Benetis et al, Med Sci Monitor, 2013 Feb 28;19:148-
152.

Why is this study retrospective?

A key part of research is identifying the independent and dependent variable. In a hypothesis,
you state that the independent variable (often X) affects the dependent variable (often Y) ina
certain way. In an experiment, X is what you manipulate while you measure what happens in Y.
In an observational study, X is what you observe and record while you measure what happens
in Y or if Y happens.

Independent Variable Dependent Variable (Y)
Central obesi

Longer surgery time Risk of brain anoxia
Coronary atherosclerosis Heart attack

Experimental Studies

In experimental studies, the researchers manipulate the environment, like randomizing one
group to receive standard diet instruction and another group to receive diet instructions plus a
group exercise class. Another example is randomizing one group to receive a new high-dose
fish oil pill and the other group to receive a placebo pill. In health care, experimental studies are
typically randomized controlled trials, like the previous example, in contrast to the basic
sciences. Note that all randomized controlled trials are prospective.

Example: Group Wellness Classes and Diabetes Blood Sugar Control

At a large university center with outpatient clinics, study investigators designed a randomized
controlled trial to assess the effect of group wellness classes on blood sugar control among
patients with diabetes. The hypothesis is that those randomized to the intervention (group
wellness classes + usual care) would have better blood sugar control than patients randomized
to the control (only usual care).

Why would we want to randomize an intervention? You can imagine that if you have a
cohort study and observed persons who volunteered for a group wellness class, or who started
exercising on their own or eating better, those people are likely different in important ways than
those who did not volunteer. Those factors, along with employment status (do they have time to
exercise or are they working multiple part-time jobs?), income (can they afford healthier foods?),
personality, baseline health status, family support, and many other factors likely influence their
blood sugar control at baseline and their ability to change it. Those factors are called
confounders.

Research Concepts 6
© 2022 Veritense™

By randomizing the patients to an intervention or control, we hope the two groups will have
equal influence from those confounding factors and due to that, we can isolate the effect of the
intervention independently from those confounders.

So, why don’t we always do research with randomized trials? Due to ethical and practical
reasons, we can’t randomize every hypothetical “treatment”. We wouldn't randomize people to
smoke or not smoke because we know it’s harmful. Nor would we randomize someone to
become pregnant or not. Furthermore, we can’t randomize some things in vulnerable
populations, such as drugs with unknown safety in pregnant women.

What is a placebo?

A placebo is when the control group (the group not randomized to the intervention) receives
some sort of “treatment” that is similar. Classically, if you were to randomize one group to an
active drug, those in the control group would receive a placebo pill that looked similar but was
just made of sugar. This way, the control group would not know whether or not they were
receiving the treatment. There is something called the placebo effect where recipients feel like
they are getting some sort of intervention, believe in it, and show improved outcomes. Note that
this is a simplified explanation of the placebo effect.

Causation versus Correlation

In the previous section, | explained why we would want to randomize an intervention. The
results of randomization give us the ability to infer causation of the independent variable on the
dependent variable. In contrast, since there is no randomization in observational studies (which
is stronger than analytic control procedures, if done properly), we typically can only infer
association or correlation. You'll note how many mainstream media sources will infer causation
from observational studies, which mislead consumers. They might even imply that results from a
mouse study are generalizable to humans. On the RD exam, you will likely see questions about
causation versus correlation and the key is to identify if the study was randomized. If it was
randomized, you can infer causation. If not, you cannot.

An example of how correlation is not causation is the association between ice cream sales and
crime sprees. When looking at these two factors, they are positively correlated. However, the
correlation doesn’t account for the fact that in the summer, both ice cream sales and crime
sprees increase. Correlation also does not account for timing, where X may cause Y, or Y may
cause X. There may also be a correlation due to random chance. These are very simplified
explanations of causation and correlation. If you are interested in pursuing this more, you can
read up on causal inference and epidemiology.

Research Concepts 7
© 2022 Veritense™

Correlation also refers to a statistical parameter, often called r. You can measure positive and
negative correlation quantitatively but only for linear relationships. Correlation does not capture
curved, or other shaped relationships, in the data. Take a look at the diagram where r= 0. One
image is a random scatter of data points, but the other two show a clear pattern. However, since
the relationship between the data points isn’t linear, no correlation is detected.

Positive correlation: X and Y increase together or decrease together
Negative correlation: as X increases, Y decreases or as X decreases, Y increases

The correlation coefficient rcan range from -1 to +1 where positive correlation is above 0 and
negative correlation is below 0. A perfect positive correlation is +1 and a perfect negative
correlation is -1. Thus, a stronger correlation is going to be an rcloser to +1 or -1, such as 0.80
or -0.80.

+1

0.80

o

<
ne

<
ne

<
in

-0.80

Z
é

Research Concepts 8
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your first pass at
applying the knowledge you've read and practiced in example calculations in a question-and-answer
format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your notes.

In the following 4 studies, decide if the study design described is prospective (P) or
retrospective (R) and explain why. Then identify the independent and dependent variables.

1.

2.

Identify lung cancer cases among factory workers and determine if they were exposed to
asbestos in the 5 years before diagnosis. Is asbestos associated with lung cancer?

Identify patients with diabetes at hospital admission and record key aspects of their
hospital stay. Examine the relationship between hospital admission characteristics and
mechanical ventilation as an event.

Identify trauma surgery patients in the medical record database over the past year and
classify them as having received enteral nutrition, parenteral nutrition, oral intake, or no
food (NPO). Examine the relationship between feeding method and length of hospital
stay.

Identify mothers whose baby died from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS). Identify
mothers with babies born the same day who are still alive. Send questionnaires to the
mothers asking about sleeping and feeding patterns.

In the following 4 studies, decide if the study design described is observational or experimental
(O or E). Then identify the independent and dependent variables and the specific study type.

5.

Investigators measure coronary artery calcium and follow participants for 20 years for
risk of heart attack.

Investigators identify cases of sleep apnea and survey patients about their eating habits
before bed.

Investigators randomize patients to a rapid extubation protocol in the ICU or to standard
procedure.

Investigators record which patients are fed enterally within 8 days of admission
compared to those who remain NPO and record serum prealbumin at discharge.

Research Concepts 9
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions (Answers)

1. Identify lung cancer cases among factory workers and determine if they were exposed to
asbestos in the 5 years before diagnosis. Is asbestos associated with lung cancer?

a. Retrospective — exposure measured after outcome. Independent = asbestos,
dependent = lung cancer

2. Identify patients with diabetes at hospital admission and record key aspects of their
hospital stay. Examine the relationship between hospital admission characteristics and
mechanical ventilation as an event.

a. Prospective — exposure measured before outcome (at hospital admission).
Independent = hospital admission characteristics, dependent = mechanical
ventilation

3. Identify trauma surgery patients in the medical record database over the past year and
classify them as having received enteral nutrition, parenteral nutrition, oral intake, or no
food (NPO). Examine the relationship between feeding method and length of hospital
Stay.

a. Retrospective — exposure measured after outcome. Independent t= feeding
method, dependent = length of hospital stay.

4. Identify mothers whose baby died from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS). Identify
mothers with babies born the same day who are still alive. Send questionnaires to the
mothers asking about sleeping and feeding patterns.

a. Retrospective — exposure measured after outcome (case control study).
Independent = sleeping and feeding patterns, dependent = SIDS. Note that this
is a classic example for case-control studies, illustrating the possibility of recall
bias, as mothers whose baby died likely think and worry about the events leading
up to it much more than mothers whose baby did not die.

5. Investigators measure coronary artery calcium and follow participants for 20 years for
risk of heart attack.

a. Observational — prospective cohort. Independent — coronary artery calcium,
dependent = heart attack

6. Investigators identify cases of sleep apnea and survey patients about their eating habits
before bed.

a. Observational -= case-control study. Independent — eating habits before bed,
dependent = sleep apnea.

7. Investigators randomize patients to a rapid extubation protocol in the ICU or to standard
procedure.

a. Experimental — randomized control trial, independent — rapid extubation protocol,
dependent — not given.

8. Investigators record which patients are fed enterally within 8 days of admission
compared to those who remain NPO and record serum prealbumin at discharge.

a. Observational — prospective clinical. Independent: enteral feed within 8 days of
admission, dependent — prealbumin at discharge.

Research Concepts 10
© 2022 Veritense™

Other Study Designs

In the previous section, | mentioned several types of study designs, like cohort, cross-sectional,
case-control, and randomized control. We categorized them by retrospective and prospective,
observational, and experimental. Now we'll talk about some other study designs that overlap
with the categories we looked at, but can also be described without categorizing them.

Surveys

In the words of CDR, surveys are “the least expensive systematic study of a cross section of
individuals.” Did you conduct any surveys as part of your college nutrition courses? Have you
ever read a research study that used a survey and published the survey questions in the
supplemental material? Have you ever completed a survey sent to you via email?

Survey questions should be phrased in a certain way as to not introduce bias when asking the
question. They may be administered by an interviewer or via computer, and may have
responses using open ended questions, scales, or a list of choices.

At cohort study visits, participants may undergo physical examinations, lab tests, and imaging
procedures, but may also complete surveys (questionnaires). Those measures may be repeated
over time, such as a food frequency questionnaire, which is a survey!

Disadvantages
Survey results are dependent on respondent's honesty
and motivation.

Advantages
Surveys can be done in a variety of ways — telephone,
mail, online, in person.

Surveys are efficient for collecting data on a large Look up social desirability bias and survey burden.

population.

Survey results can be biased by non-response bias —
those who don't return the survey or who decline to
participate may be different in some systematic way
compared to those who participate.

Surveys can focus on specific questions related to the
research question, but also collect basic information to
describe your population and relate them to other study
populations. These include demographic variables
(gender, sex, race, ethnicity, educational level,
household income, urban or rural residence) and other
variables.

Look up healthy volunteer effect.

Questions or answer choices may be interpreted
differently by different respondents.

— questions may not measure what you intend for
them to measure (validity)

Surveys can be used to address many research topics.

Focus Groups

Focus groups are a qualitative research technique that groups together a
small number of people with a moderator to lead them through a discussion.

Discussion questions are open-ended and the goal is to collect information O O O
about the thoughts and feelings that aren’t easily captured in standard survey
responses, like scales.

Focus groups also help discover thoughts behind actions, such as why community members
aren't buying more produce or biking to work, despite sales and incentives.

Research Concepts 11
© 2022 Veritense™

The moderator may also step out of the room and observe the group so the participants don’t
feel self-conscious, especially if the moderator is representative of a certain stakeholder.

Advantages
Focus groups are useful when outcomes are
unpredictable.

Disadvantages
A dominant voice in the group can dominate the
discussion and discourage others from speaking up.

Use when you want open feedback but don’t need to
compare results.

“Groupthink” is a concern. What is groupthink?

Participants are less likely to express negative ideas in-
person than with a survey.

Participants can express ideas and feelings not
captured in a survey.

Focus groups require a skilled moderator.

Comments from other participants can stimulate more
discussion.

Focus groups are resource intensive, both to plan and
conduct. They also have notable participant burden
since they take time.

Moderator can observe dynamics between focus group
members.

Health Risk Appraisal

A health risk appraisal, or health risk assessments, are the first step in multi-step health
promotion programs. They are individual-level assessments often used by wellness companies
and health insurance companies. There is no standard way to conduct a health risk appraisal
but it may include the following:

1. Participant provides self-reported health-related information, including
e Behaviors: eating patterns, average sleep duration, employment status, smoking
frequency, alcohol consumption
e Risk factors or diagnoses: Have you ever been diagnosed with...diabetes, heart
disease, heart failure? Has a doctor ever told you that you have hypertension? Have you
ever had a stroke or heart attack?

2. Participant receives individualized feedback based on self-reported health information
e You mentioned being diagnosed with diabetes. Because you have diabetes, you are ata
higher risk of developing heart disease, including stroke, heart attack, or heart failure.

3. Information is used to provide at least one recommendation or intervention towards

promoting health, sustaining function, or preventing disease

e You can reduce your risk of heart disease by eating more colorful foods and reducing
your intake of processed foods.

e If you quit smoking, after 6 months your risk of heart disease will be similar to someone
who has never smoked.

e As you age, it’s important to maintain your balance and strength. You can do this by
walking regularly, doing weight-bearing exercises, or participating in yoga or tai chi
exercises.

Research Concepts 12
© 2022 Veritense™

The health risk assessment may also include clinical exams to record height, weight, BMI, heart
rate, blood pressure, and functional tests like grip strength, chair rise, or a walk test. A term
used in the wellness industry for this is a “biometric screening”, which includes blood lipids and
sugar, BMI, blood pressure, and waist circumference.

Many employers offer health risk assessments and even provide financial incentives to
complete them or achieve certain benchmarks. They may employ a wellness company to
administer them, analyze the data, and make recommendations for company-wide wellness
programs.

Screening

The biometric component of a health risk assessment may serve as a
screening tool for hypertension, diabetes, or heart disease risk. However, to
screen for other diseases, we need to conduct tests that relate to the
disease-specific processes.

See below for screening test examples and contrast them against the
diagnostic test. Diagnostic tests are typically more invasive or costly, and are only done if the
screening test is positive. Other diseases don’t have a separate screening or diagnostic test,
though it might be called a screening test based on the setting. For example, checking
everyone's blood pressure at a community health fair day, providing feedback to those with
borderline or high blood pressure, and recommending that they see their physician is screening.
If they go see their physician and their blood pressure is still elevated, the physician would
consider that a diagnostic test.

Some screening tests are simply a set of questions, and with enough positive answers, signify
the need to proceed for diagnostic testing. For example, a doctor may order hepatitis C testing
(diagnostic) if a patient received a blood transfusion or organ transplant before 1992, has ever
used injectable drugs, or has chronic liver disease, HIV, or AIDS (screening questions) because
these are all factors associated with increased risk. For patients who answer no to all of these
questions, the cost associated with the diagnostic test outweighs the unlikely positive result.

Screening Test Disease Diagnostic Test

Blood pressure Hypertension Elevated blood pressure after
P yP standard protocol
Blood sugar Diabetes Oral glucose tolerance test

Pap smear Cervical cancer Biopsy

Prostate specific antigen blood test Prostate cancer Biopsy

Research Concepts 13
© 2022 Veritense™

Recruitment Strategies

To find participants for a prospective study, observational or experimental, there are two ways
you can go about it statistically. The goal of probability sampling strategies is to reduce
“sampling error’, more commonly called selection bias. You may see the term “sampling error”
instead on the exam.

Probability Strategies

Random Sampling: With random sampling, each individual in the population

has the same probability of being sampled. This method is most often done by Q
assigning a number to each potential participant. For example, using a list of

DMV driver’s license numbers, class roster, or patient registry, and then ie
drawing a random sample. Another way to think about it would be to label

each person in your internship class with a number. Then, for each person, flip

a coin where heads means they are included in the study and tails means they are not. Thus,
selection would be due to chance.

The population that you draw your random sample from matters. Imagine you want to do a

study on how frequently older adults go to the gym. If you draw a random sample from a list of
gym members versus a random sample from a telephone list, your results will
likely differ, because everyone on the gym membership list has joined a gym.

Cluster Sampling: When the population of interest exists in “units,” rather than
individuals, we call them clusters. For example, if you wanted to implement a
healthy lunch initiative at local elementary school, it would be difficult to
randomize each student. Instead, we call each school a “cluster” and we
randomize each school to the intervention or not. Thus, the “unit of
randomization” is the school.

Nationally representative surveys utilize multi-stage sampling. NHANES
samples at the county level first, then by segments, then by households, and
then by individuals.

Non-Probability Sampling

Convenience Sampling: Convenience sampling means you sample participants in a way that
is convenient. For example, you need college students to fill out your survey. You sit in the
student union and ask each person that walks by to fill out your survey. You might approach it
systematically by asking every 5" person who walks in to fill out your survey.

Snowball Sampling: You ask participants to write down the name of acquaintances they think
would be open to participating. Your final sample will likely be more similar to one another in
certain ways because friends, families, and neighbors will join. However, this can be
advantageous if you are studying something that is environmental or cultural.

Research Concepts 14
© 2022 Veritense™

Food Science Designs
Paired Comparison Test

Also called a preference test, in a paired comparison test, a judge is presented with 2 samples
(A and B) and asked to choose the one that is higher in a certain attribute. Attributes can be
things like sweetness, crispness, or a certain color. Samples are presented in two possible
sequences, randomized across at least 30 judges (AB, BA).

Example: Apple Pies

You want to see if the judges prefer a home-baked apple pie versus

store-bought, specifically regarding appearance. You recruit judges and
present 15 with home-baked followed by store-bought, and the other 15
jud presented with store-bought followed by home-baked.

Triangle Test

In a triangle test, two identical samples and one different sample are presented to the judge.
The judge identifies which is different. In contrast to the paired comparison test, there is no
specific question about sensory characteristics. There are 6 possible sequences: ABB, BAA,
AAB, BBA, ABA, BAB that are randomized across all judges. All 6 sequences must be
presented the same number of times. If you have 30 judges, each sequence would be
presented to 5 judges each.

Example: Cola

You want to see if judges can tell the difference between store-brand cola and

brand-name cola. You present samples to each judge, in the 6 different
sequences, and record which one they indicate is different from the others.

Quantitative Descriptive Test (QDA)

QDA is a descriptive test that recruits 8 to 12 panelists that are trained on sensory
characteristics. The first step is for panelists to agree on terminology beforehand. They rate
samples based on various sensory characteristics, such as juiciness, sweetness, firmness,
crispness, acidity, aroma — typically positive attributes.

Example: Burgers

Panelists are asked to express the degree to which a characteristic is present in ~~
samples of a fast food burger by assigning a value on the scales previously —_——
determined.

On a sheet of paper, write out the definitions and provide examples for the following terms:
health risk appraisal, screening, triangle test, focus group, descriptive test, survey, and paired
comparison test.

Research Concepts 15
© 2022 Veritense™

Quality of Evidence

There are several resources from the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics that you need to be
familiar with for the exam. One of them is the Evidence Analysis Library. For a variety of topics,
the Academy’s EAL Working Group has put together guidelines based on current evidence in
the form of systematic reviews, evidence-based nutrition practice guidelines, and position
papers. The following are from the Academy’s EAL Topic List page (www.andeal.org/topic-list):

e Systematic review: “a high-level process that collects and critically analyzes multiple research
studies or papers on a clearly formulated question using explicit methods to identify, select, and
critically appraise the primary research.”

e Evidence-based nutrition practice guideline: “guiding statements, developed from a systematic
review, designed to assist practitioner and patients’ decisions about appropriate nutrition care for
specific disease states or conditions.”

e Position paper: “a critical analysis of current facts, data and research literature on a specific issue. A
key feature is the Position Statement, which presents the Academy’s stance on a specific issue that
impacts the public’s nutritional status and is controversial, confusing, or requires professional
clarification. As of 2017, all new and updated Academy position papers are generated from EAL
systematic reviews.”

Position paper topics include adult weight management, breastfeeding, chronic kidney disease,
fluoride, single service portion sized meals and weight management, vegetarian nutrition, and
many more. | highly suggest reading the EAL resources for the following topics to prepare for
the exam.

Evidence Grades

In the EAL, you will find different Evidence Grades associated with different statements. The
Evidence Grades reflect how consistent and strong the evidence is behind a recommendation.
You should be familiar with what the four grades mean and their order (Grade | is strong while
Grade Ill is weak, not the other way around).

The narrative explanations of the evidence grades provide an overview of how and why the
evidence grades are assigned. The expert workgroup members consider various aspects of the
existing research to assign these evidence grades. These aspects include:

e Quality of the study e Consistency of findings across studies
o Scientific rigor and validity o Magnitude of effect
o Design and execution e Clinical impact
e Quantity of studies and subjects o Importance of studied outcomes
o Number of studies e Generalizability of findings
o Number of subjects in o To the population of interest
studies

Research Concepts 16
© 2022 Veritense™

In the next few pages, | go more in depth on the evidence grades, with examples of statements
in each category, from the Adult Weight Management and Diabetes Management Guidelines in
the Academy’s Evidence Analysis Library. You can see the distinction between strong/good and
fair as a thin line because we often consider recommendations as “no-brainers” that have fair
evidence.

In your own words and on a sheet of paper, write out the definitions and examples of each
grade of evidence based on the past few pages. Questions on the exam will likely require you to
know which grade (Grade | or Grade IV or V) correspond to the highest quality of evidence and
recognize the definition.

Grade |: Good / Strong - “The evidence consists of results from studies of
strong design for answering the question addressed. The results are both
Clinically important and consistent with minor exceptions at most. The results
are free of serious doubts about generalizability, bias, and flaws in research
design. Studies with negative results have sufficiently large sample sizes to
have adequate statistical power.”

Grade Il: Fair - “The evidence consists of results from studies of strong design
answering the question addressed, but there is uncertainty attached to the
conclusion because of inconsistencies among the results from different
studies or because of doubts about generalizability, bias, research design
flaws, or adequacy of sample size. Alternatively, the evidence consists solely
of results from weaker designs for the questions addressed, but the results
have been confirmed in separate studies and are consistent with minor
exceptions at most.”

Grade Ill: Limited / Weak - “The evidence consists of results from a limited
number of studies of weak design for answering the questions addressed.
Evidence from studies of strong design is either unavailable because no
studies of strong design have been done or because the studies that have
been done are inconclusive due to lack of generalizability, bias, design flaws,
or inadequate sample sizes.”

Grade IV: Expert opinion only / Consensus - “The support of the conclusion
consists solely of the statement of informed medical commentators based on
their clinical experience, unsubstantiated by the results of any research
studies.”

Grade V: Insufficient Evidence / Grade Not Assignable- “There is no
evidence available that directly supports or refutes the conclusion.”

To visit the EAL, sign in to your www.eatrightpro.org account, go to Research — Applied
Practice — Evidence Analysis Library.

Research Concepts 17
© 2022 Veritense™

As you read through the next few pages, highlight and write down any terms you’re not familiar
with. Look them up later.

Grade |: Good/Strong

Quality Strong study design, free from design flaws, bias, and execution problems

Findings consistent in direction and effect size / degree of association,

Consistency statistical significance, with minor exceptions

One to several good quality studies, large number of subjects, studies with
Quantity negative results have sufficiently large sample size for adequate statistical
power

Outcome relates directly to question, size of effect clinically meaningful,
statistically significant difference is large

a Studied population, intervention, and outcomes free from serious doubts about
Generalizability wa
generalizability

Example: Medical Nutrition Therapy: MNT provided by an RDN is recommended for overweight and
obese adults. MNT provided by an RDN results in both statistically significant and clinically meaningful
weight loss in overweight and obese adults, as well as reduced risk for diabetes, disorders of lipid
metabolism and hypertension.

Clinical Impact

Grade Il: Fair

. Strong study design, minor methods concerns or only studies of weak study
Quality design

Inconsistency among studies with strong design or consistency with minor

Consistency exceptions across weaker study designs

Several studies by independent investigators, but doubts about adequacy of

Quantity sample size to avoid type | and type II error

Clinical Impact Some doubt about statistical or clinical significance of the effect
Generalizability Minor doubts about generalizability

Example: Referral to RDN for MNT: For weight loss and weight maintenance, the RDN should
individualize the meal pattern to distribute calories at meals and snacks throughout the day, including
breakfast. The majority of observational research reported that breakfast consumption is associated
with a lower BMI and decreased obesity risk. Several studies suggest that cereal-based breakfasts are
associated with lower BMI while breakfasts that are very high in energy are associated with higher BMI.

Research Concepts 18
© 2022 Veritense™

Grade Ill: Limited/Weak

Quality

Studies of weak design or inconclusive findings due to design flaws, bias, or
execution problems

Unexplained inconsistency among results from other studies, or a single study

Consistency only

Limited number of studies, low number of subjects studied, and/or inadequate

Quantity sample size for statistical power

Studied outcome is an intermediate outcome or surrogate for the true outcome
of interest, or the effect size is small or lacks statistical or clinical significance

ae Serious doubts about generalizability due to a narrow or different study
Generalizability , . .
population, intervention, or outcomes studied

Example: Educate on intake of FDA-approved non-nutritive sweeteners: The RDN should educate
adults with diabetes that intake of FDA-approved non-nutritive sweeteners within the recommended
daily intake levels established by FDA will not have a significant effect on glycemic control. Research
reports no significant impact of consuming FDA-approved non-nutritive sweeteners independent of
weight loss on A1C, fasting glucose levels or insulin levels.

Clinical Impact

Grade IV: Expert Opinion Only/Consensus

No studies available; conclusions based on usual practice, expert consensus,

Quali . a . .
ty clinical experience, opinion, or extrapolation from basic research

Conclusion supported solely by statement of informed nutrition or medical

Consistency experts

Quantity Unsubstantiated by published research studies

Clinical Impact Objective data unavailable

Generalizability Generalizability limited to scope of experience

Example: Encourage physical activity for weight loss: For weight maintenance, the RDN should
encourage physical activity as part of a comprehensive weight management program, individualized to
accumulate 200 to 300 minutes or more of physical activity per week, depending on intensity, unless
medically contraindicated. Some studies support the value of approximately 200 to 300 minutes per
week of physical activity during weight maintenance to reduce weight regain after weight loss.

Research Concepts 19
© 2022 Veritense™

Quantitative versus Qualitative
Quantitative

Quantitative Data

For the exam, you'll need to understand the difference between quantitative and qualitative
data. Here are features of quantitative data.

e Information that can be measured and written in numbers

e Discover facts and associations; test theories and hypotheses

e Data collected through measurement, including controlled observation, experiments, and
surveys, with a rating scale or yes/no answers

e Data analyzed by numerical comparison and statistical analysis (descriptive statistics
and inferential statistics)

e Data reported through statistical analyses, including means, standard deviations,
medians, ranges, percentages, odds ratios, and hazard ratios

e Large sample sizes to conduct meaningful and accurate statistical analyses

e May include random sampling or survey sampling to improve robustness of conclusions

Quantitative Research

For an example of quantitative research, let’s use an example of a randomized trial. Your clinic
is exploring the effectiveness of a diabetes control program that involves group classes on
topics, like diet and exercise, to meet twice a week. Your team designs a trial where you
randomize your patients with diabetes to either attend the group classes twice a week for 12
weeks, in addition to regular clinic check-ups, or just regular clinic check-ups alone (usual care,
control group). At the beginning of the trial, you measure each participants’ weight, height, waist
circumference, heart rate, blood pressure, fasting blood glucose, and hemoglobin A1c. You also
conduct a 24-hour dietary recall and a physical activity questionnaire with each participant.
Every 4 weeks after randomization, you repeat these measurements, including the 24-hour
recall and physical questionnaire in both the treatment group and the control group.

Ciimc patents

aghgigigizay

Randomization

7
agigig = Aggy

Control group Treatment group
| | Clinic check-ups
i) on oO Group classes

O.0 \a ay about ciet &
i a i exercise
e

®-®@
Clinic check-ups only e%s

Research Concepts 20
© 2022 Veritense™

Below is a hypothetical table (Table 1) we might produce from our randomized trial. Note that
there is very little difference in treatment and control group characteristics at baseline because
that is what randomization intends to do.

Instead, if we had asked clinic patients which group they wanted to be in, we might have
patients with better glucose control, more physical activity, lower BMI, or of a younger age in the
treatment group, or it could go the other way where patients who are doing worse self-select
themselves to the more intensive treatment program. Randomization, in theory, removes the
effect of these characteristics so that we can isolate the effect of our treatment.

In some studies, you might see a column for p-values, where a value of <0.05 or <0.01 (called
the alpha level) is deemed “statistically significant”. This column is unnecessary for most, if not
all, studies and are especially unnecessary for randomized trials. If randomization was done
correctly, any “statistically significant” differences between the two groups would be due to
random chance. Note in the table that we don’t have names, themes, codes, or quotes from
participants. Instead, we have numbers expressed as mean + SD or % (N).

Table 1. Baseline characteristics of study population.

Treatment Group Control Group
(N = 25) (N = 25)
Age (years) 44+4 45+5
Female 48% (12) 52% (13)
White 40% (10) 44% (11)
Body mass index (kg/m?) 37+2 38 +3
Systolic blood pressure (mmHg) 131 +2 133 +2
Fasting blood glucose (mmol/L) 156 +11 162 +9
Hemoglobin A1C (%) 7.2 +1.2 7.4 +1.4
Average physical activity (min/wk) 20 +15 24 +13

Research Concepts 21
© 2022 Veritense™

Here is a hypothetical Table 2, which shows the average changes in key parameters or
outcomes, such as change in weight, blood pressure, fasting glucose, and physical activity. You
can see the average measures, followed by the range of change in parentheses. All of the
results from this study are expressed as numbers, quantifying what was measured, and allowing
for direct and statistical comparison between the treatment and control group.

Table 2. Average change in key parameters over study time in treatment and control group.

Treatment Group
(N = 25)

Average % weight change

4 weeks - 2% (-1.5 — -2.2%)
8 weeks - 3% (-2.6 — -3.4%)
12 weeks - 4% (-3.2 — -4.1%)

Average change in systolic blood
pressure (mmHg)

4 weeks - 1 mmHg (+1 — -2 mmHg)
8 weeks - 3 mmHg (-2 — -4 mmHg)
12 weeks - 5 mmbug (-3 — -6 mmHg)

Average change in fasting blood
glucose (mmol/L)

4 weeks - 2 (+1 - -3 mmol/L)
8 weeks - 4(- 1—-5 mmol/L)
12 weeks - 9 (- 6 --11 mmol/L)

Average change in weekly
physical activity

4 weeks + 10 (9-15 min/wk)
8 weeks + 15 (11 — 17 min/wk)
12 weeks + 20 (18 — 24 min/wk)

Control Group
(N = 25)

+ 0.5% (0.2 — 0.7%)
- 0.8% (-0.6 — -0.9%)
- 1% (-1.6 — -2.3%)

+ 2mmbHg (1 —-3 mmHg)
+4mmbg (2 —- 6 mmHg)
+9 mmHg (7 — 11 mmHg)

+2 (1-3 mmol/L)
+ 3 (2—4 mmol/L)
+2 (1-3 mmol/L)

+5 (- 2—7 min/wk)
+ 10 (9 — 12 min/wk)
+12 (10 — 15 min/wk)

Research Concepts 22
© 2022 Veritense™

Qualitative
Qualitative Data
The following list describes qualitative data.

e Information about qualities, often expressed in themes or quotes

e Attempt to understand human behavior from the interviewee’s perspective

e Collect information via observation and interviews

e Data analyzed by themes and descriptions

e Data reported in quotes from interviewees

e Non-statistical analyses used, including content analysis, grounded theory, and thematic
analysis

e Smaller sample sizes used due to the burden of interviewing participants

e Context-rich data of words and texts, photographs, videos, and sound recordings

e Difficult to apply reliability and validity standards due to subjectivity

Qualitative Research

For an example of qualitative research, I'll use a project | did for my Social Nutrition course in
college. The purpose was to understand the variety of childhood experiences around food and
eating among college students. My methods included writing an open-ended interview script
and conducting content analysis to discover themes.

Using previous literature, | came up with a draft interview script that asked questions about how
often the interviewee ate family meals, who typically purchased and prepared foods, what their
feelings and memories about food were growing up, and how those feelings changed over time.

| piloted this script with several interviewees to allow for refinement. Sometimes, the questions
you draft aren’t actually asking what you think they are. People interpret questions differently
and the nature of qualitative research is that it is incredibly subjective. By piloting, you can
identify when that occurs, and reformat your questions so that they have better construct
validity.

As the researcher, you are immersed in the situation you construct for your participant, and
similar to nutrition counselling, you learn the most about your interviewee by using well phrased,
open-ended questions.

During interviews, data collection is done in the form of taking notes and often recording
interviews for verbatim transcripts later. Those transcripts are then reviewed via thematic
analysis to discover themes.

While you don’t need to know details of how to conduct qualitative research or analysis, it is
helpful to have these examples to distinguish between the two.

Take out a sheet of paper and write out the characteristics, advantages, disadvantages, and
examples of quantitative versus qualitative data and research.

Research Concepts 23
© 2022 Veritense™

Thematic Analysis

To conduct thematic analysis, go through these 6 steps.

Familiarization Transcribe the data and prepare the narrative.
Re-read the data and note initial ideas.

Code interesting features in a systematic fashion across the
Generate initial codes entire data set.
Collate data relevant to each code.

Search for themes Collate codes into potential themes.
Gather data relevant to each theme.

Examine if themes work in relation to the coded extracts and
. the data as a whole.
4 Review themes Review the data to search for additional themes.
Generate a thematic map of analysis.

Define and name Refine theme specifics and the overall story being told.
themes Generate clear definitions and names for each theme.

Select compelling examples.

Complete final analysis of each extract.

Relate the analysis back to the research question, objective,
and existing literature.

Produce the report

Siem
transcribe “
interview note | initia Ele Ee =n A

Generate initial codes

Collate data for each
code Collate codes into
potential themes

Research Concepts 24
© 2022 Veritense™

Epidemiology Methods and Biostatistics
Validity

Validity is the extent to which an instrument measures what it is supposed to measure. It’s
helpful to think of validity in two ways: is it measuring what you want it to measure (for example,
depression but not anxiety) and the general accuracy of the measure.

Is it measuring what you want it to measure?

There are different types of validity that are tested when a new instrument is developed. For
example, let's imagine a group of researchers are developing a questionnaire for depression.
Before this instrument should be used in research, the researchers should demonstrate that it is
valid.

e Face validity: does it seem like it is a valid measure of depression? Do the questions and range of
options seem appropriate? Or does it ask about things not related or relevant to depression?

e Content validity: does it measure what it is intended to measure? Questions should consider the
known symptoms of depression, such as mood, sleeping issues, weight change, and so on. If their
questions are more congruent with symptoms of anxiety, they won't be capturing depression like they
think.

e Construct validity: ability to measure an abstract concept adequately. If they gave a similar
questionnaire on happiness or satisfaction, would the results be opposite of the depression
questionnaire? Is there divergence to distinguish between the two different constructs?

e Criterion validity: extent to which the measurement is able to produce accurate findings when
compared to a gold standard, such as a clinical diagnosis of depression. The researchers could
calculate the sensitivity and specificity of their questionnaire compared to a clinical diagnosis.

General Accuracy

When thinking about general accuracy, we relate validity to systematic bias. Teachers often use
a bullseye example. If the center of the target is the truth, a valid measure will hit the truth most
of the time. If it is not a valid measure, it will be consistently somewhere else on the target. We'll
talk more about this with bias and error.

Reliability

Reliability is the degree to which a measurement produces consistent outcomes. Does the
instrument consistently measure what it is intended to measure? Just like with validity, there are
different ways to measure and quantify reliability because there are different aspects of
reliability.

e  Test-retest reliability: refers to repeatability. If we administer the depression questionnaire to one
group of individuals, and then administer it again a week later to the same people, we would expect
very similar levels of depression. In nutrition, you can think about the test-retest reliability of a food
frequency questionnaire.

Research Concepts 25
© 2022 Veritense™

e Internal consistency: do similar questions give rise to similar answers? If we have two questions
about sleep and two questions about mood on our depression questionnaire, do they give consistent
answers for the same person?

e Inter-rater reliability: if two staff members administer the depression questionnaire to the same
person, will the results be similar? If our staff members are straying from the wording or changing
their protocol in some way, the results may not be consistent. We also use inter-rater reliability when
we have adjudicated events, such as two dietitians reviewing the same medical charts and
determining who is malnourished. When there is some level of subjectivity, we use inter-rater
reliability to look at consistency and agreement between the two experts.

General precision

Just as validity is related to general accuracy, reliability is related to general precision and
random error. Consistent measures fall consistently close together. With the bullseye example,
points clustered together are considered reliable. Points spread out would not be reliable or
precise.

Bias and Error

If you step on your bathroom scale each day and it is not calibrated, it may consistently give you
a reading that is 2 lbs higher than the truth. This would be a reliable measure, but it would also
be biased. In contrast, if your scale sometimes gives you + 1 pound, - 1 pound, +2.5 pounds,
and so on, it is not producing a consistent measure and there is no rhyme or reason as to the
number it gives you. This is random error.

See the table below for an example of 4 readings relative to the truth, 150 Ib.

ee ee
155.2 Ib 152 Ib 154 Ib

154.9 Ib 151 Ib 157 Ib
155 Ib 148 Ib 153 Ib

Bias is related to accuracy and validity. How close is your measurement to the truth of 150 Ibs?
Random error is related to precision and reliability. How consistent are your measurements to
one another? How close together are they?

Bias is also referred to as systematic error in contrast to precision which is random error.
There are different types of bias, many of which carry the term “error,” so don’t be confused.
Some types of bias include non-response error, measurement error, sampling error, and
social desirability bias, among others. You may see both non-response error and non-
response bias. They refer to the same thing.

Research Concepts 26
© 2022 Veritense™

Active Learning Opportunity: A great active learning technique would be to write the terms in
this packet on one side of flashcards and the definition on the other. Then, repeat. Flip one set
of flashcards so the terms face up and the other so the definitions face up. Spread them out
before you and match them up. This method is particularly effective if you learn best when using
your hands or manipulating information. It’s easy to check your matching by simply flipping over
one of the cards.

Types of Bias

“Bias is any process at any stage of inference which tends to produce results or conclusions
that differ systematically from the truth.” — Sackett (1979)

PS. You don't need to know that quote as a definition.

Observer effect: the researcher or interviewer's body language or intonation affects the way
participants respond. This can occur during a nutrition counseling session, too.

* In research, you may be reading out questions to a participant in contrast to a participant
doing a paper-and-pen or computer survey. The tone of your voice, sighing, or remarking on
an answer, instead of just saying “Ok” can influence the interview. The fact that another
person is “witnessing” their responses can also influence the interview.

* In counseling, we can generally avoid leading questions via open ended questions, however
it can still persist. For example, asking “What do you dislike about your current situation?” is
a leading question because you automatically assign “dislike” instead of asking “How do you
feel about your current situation?”

Social desirability bias: occurs when the participant responds in a way that they think they
should. We see this often when asking about societal taboos, such as illicit drug use or
smoking, particularly during pregnancy.

* In research, we often ask about taboo topics via self-administered surveys. For example,
NHANES now uses computerized surveys that participants fill out in a private booth with the
aim that we will get more accurate measures of smoking prevalence and drug use.

* In counseling, we can address this bias by developing a strong and neutral relationship with
our patient. If they know that they will not be judged, they will be honest and progress can
be made.

Selection bias: occurs when the people you decide to include in your study are not
representative of the population you are aiming to study. For example, if you want to study the
health of children in your county, but you only enroll children from private school, you will likely
encounter selection bias because children in private school do not adequately represent all
children in your county. One way to address selection bias is random sampling, such as taking a
list of all children in your county and randomly choosing participants. Selection bias is one of the
main threats to validity and generalizability. It is almost never possible (time-wise and

Research Concepts 27
© 2022 Veritense™

financially) to recruit every single member of your target population so you have to make a
decision about who is included.

Sampling error: similar to selection bias but it occurs at the stage of analysis. When the data
points used in analysis do not represent the entire population of data, the results of the analysis
will not represent the results obtained from the entire population.

In the diagram, the target population is who
we want to do research about. We select
our study population to represent this target
population as best we can. Selection bias
occurs when as we select participants from
the target population to be in the study
population. Sampling error occurs as we
select participants from our study population
into our sample population, or our analytic
sample, as it is sometimes called.

sampling error

Reporting bias: occurs when the direction or statistical significance of results influences
whether and how the research is reported. Some researchers conduct their experiments but
only report what they find to be significant. This borders on unethical research practice because
it is not transparent.

Publication bias: occurs when papers finding a null result (no association) are not submitted
to review, or are not selected for publication, in favor of reports finding strong positive or
negative findings. The result is a body of literature with only strong positive or negative findings.
Due to this, other researchers are repeating the same studies that have already resulted in null
results since they are not aware that has already been done.

Measurement error: an error in the difference between a measured quantity and the true
value. It is composed of both random error as a result of imprecision, and systematic error as a
result of inaccuracy. Note that random error will always be present. Systematic error, or bias,
can be caused by a miscalibrated instrument (like the body weight scale), an invalid
questionnaire, etc.

Misclassification error: a type of measurement error that applies to variables that are
categorical or binary. The result of misclassification error is that someone is shifted into another
category.

Non-response bias: if you send out a survey to 1,000 people in your county and only 100
responds, you should be concerned about non-response bias. That is, the people who did not
respond may be systematically different than those who did respond. Good quality studies
report their response rate.

Healthy volunteer bias: the flip-side of non-response bias. Persons who volunteer for research
trials, or who are most likely to respond to health surveys, tend to be healthier, more aware of
their health status, and even of a higher socioeconomic status than those who do not.

Research Concepts 28
© 2022 Veritense™

Accuracy and Precision

In the Validity and Reliability section, | discussed a “bullseye”. The “truth” is the very center of
the inner circle. High accuracy means getting close to the truth. High precision means having
points clustered close together. How do accuracy and precision relate to validity and reliability?
How would the example about weighing yourself fit in with this?

s — —
Low accuracy High ‘accuracy Low accuracy High accuracy
Low precision Low precision High precision High precision

On a sheet of paper, write out the definitions of terms we’ve discussed so far: validity, accuracy,
bias, reliability, precision, and random error. Research more online to round out your
understanding. Questions on the RD exam will ask about the definitions of validity or reliability
and you'll need to be able to identify which is which.

Research Concepts 29
© 2022 Veritense™

Sensitivity and Specificity
When we use a screening test, those we screen will fall into 4 categories.

Among those who truly have the disease, the screening test will correctly identify some
(true positives, TP) and incorrectly miss some (false negatives, FN).

Among those who truly do not have the disease, the screen will incorrectly classify some
as positive (false positive, FP) and correctly classify others as disease-free (true
negatives, TN).

These four groups are depicted in contingency tables. Along the top is the true disease status
and on the side is the screening test results.

Sensitivity and specificity are statistical properties of a test. They do not vary with how common
a disease is. Two different screening tests for the same disease likely have different sensitivity
and specificity.

Sensitivity is the ability of a test to correctly identify those with a disease. That is, how often a
positive test result corresponds to positive disease status.

Specificity is the ability of a test to correctly identify those without disease as disease-free. That
is, how often a negative test result corresponds to negative disease status.

A test with 100% sensitivity would produce a positive test in everyone with the disease. No one
would have a false negative result. A test with 100% specificity would produce a negative test in
everyone without the disease. No one would have a false positive test result.

True Status / Gold Standard

Positive Negative

TP TN

Research Concepts 30
© 2022 Veritense™

Positive Predictive and Negative Predictive Value

We're going to continue with the cancer screening example but now focus on positive predictive
value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV). Both are a function of the test and the
prevalence of the disease in the population being tested.

Positive predictive value is the probability that a patient has the disease, given a positive
screening test value.

Negative predictive value is the probability that a patient does not have the disease, givena
negative screening test value.

With sensitivity and specificity, we were looking at the right and left columns, up and down. With
PPV and NPV, we will be looking across the rows, but we'll still be using the true positive and
true negative cells.

The PPV is useful for answering the question, “Given that | had a positive test result, what is the
probability | have the disease?” Because the PPV is a function of both the test and the
underlying population, PPV will be different in a population with a high disease prevalence than
in a population with a low disease prevalence.

True Status / Gold Standard

Positive Negative

TP + FN FP + TN

TP TN

PPV= NPV=
TP + FP FN + TN

Research Concepts 31
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions

Answer these study guide questions using the study guide text. These questions will be your first pass at
applying the knowledge you’ve read and practiced in example calculations in a question-and-answer
format. Instead of answering them from memory, go to the text and your notes.

1. Ina hypothetical study population of 40 people, 12 of them have cancer and 28 are cancer-free. The
standard way to diagnose this type of cancer is a biopsy. Biopsies involve taking a tissue sample and
examining the pathology to determine if the cells are cancerous. We will call biopsy the “gold
standard” and it will stand in for the truth, which we never completely know.

In this hypothetical example, the biopsy test correctly classifies cancer 100% of the time, and
correctly excludes cancer 100% of the time (sensitivity and specificity are both 100%). In this small
study to test the properties of a new blood test, we find the following results. Of those who truly have
cancer, 9 had a positive blood test (true positive). Of those who are truly cancer free, 1 has a positive
blood test (false positive). Positive test results are denoted by a filled, solid black circle.

a.

b.

Which test goes along the top of the table? Which test goes along the side? Fill in the bottom
totals of the total, corresponding to TP+FN and FP+TN in the example table.

Which people correspond to true positives? Which people correspond to false positives? Fill in
those cells in the table.

Fill in the rest of the table with math.

Calculate the sensitivity and the specificity of the test, and interpret what they mean. Note that on
the exam you won't need to calculate sensitivity or specificity. You'll need to know the definition
and how to interpret the rules.

Have cancer Cancer-free

“a nae Sensitivity =

Specificity =

Research Concepts 32
© 2022 Veritense™

Use your contingency table from calculating sensitivity and specificity (question 1) to answer
questions 2 and 3.

2.

Imagine that one of the patients with a positive blood test result comes in to their doctor’s

office for a follow-up. They want to know how likely it is they have cancer. Calculate the PPV
and interpret.

Imagine that one of the patients with a negative blood test result asks their doctor over the

phone, after getting the good news, how likely it is that they really don’t have cancer.
Calculate the NPV and interpret.

Fill in the statements with the correct term: specific, negative predictive value, sensitivity,

positive predictive value. Terms may repeat.

a.

b.

If 100 patients with a disease are tested but only 80 test positive for the disease, that
means the test has a of 80%.

If 100 patients without a disease are tested and 90 test negative for the disease, that
means the test has a of 90%.

If 100 patients test positive on a screening test but only 20 truly have the disease, that
means that the is 20%.

If 100 patients test negative on a screening test but only 97% are truly disease-free, that
means the is 97%.

The ability of a test to correctly identify all screened individuals who are positive for a
disease is the test's .

The ability of a test to correctly exclude all screened individuals without a disease is the
test's

5. For the following contingency table, calculate the sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV.
Interpret the numbers with the wording of the previous fill-in-the blanks and matching.

Colonoscopy

+ -
FIT blood + 6,730
test 93,270

1,000 99,000 100,000

Research Concepts 33
© 2022 Veritense™

Study Guide Questions (Answers)

1. In ahypothetical study population of 40 people, 12 of them have cancer and 28 are
cancer-free. The standard way to diagnose this type of cancer is a biopsy. Biopsies
involve taking a tissue sample and examining the pathology to determine if the cells are
cancerous. We will call biopsy the “gold standard” and it will stand in for the truth, which

we never completely know.
Biopsy

Sensitivity = 9 / 12 = 0.75 — A sensitivity of + .

0.75, or 75% means that the blood test + 9 | 4] 10
identifies 75% of those who truly have cancer, 8!00d Test 30

Conversely, the test has a false negative rate
of 25%. 12 28 40

Specificity = 27 / 28 = 0.96 — A specificity of 0.96 or 96% means that the blood test correctly
identifies 96% of those who truly do not have cancer. Conversely, the test has a false positive
rate of 4%.

2. Imagine that one of the patients with a positive blood test result comes in to their
doctor's office for a follow-up. They want to know how likely it is they have cancer.
Calculate the PPV and interpret.

PPV =9/10=0.90 — A PPV of 90% means that for patients with a positive test result, there is
a 90% probability that they do have cancer.

3. Imagine that one of the patients with a negative blood test result asks their doctor over
the phone, after getting the good news, how likely it is that they really don’t have cancer.
Calculate the NPV and interpret.

NPV = 27/30 =0.90 — An NPV of 90% means that for patients with a negative test result,
there is a 90% probability that they do not have cancer.

Research Concepts 34
© 2022 Veritense™

4. Fill in the statements with the correct term: specific, negative predictive value, sensitivity,
positive predictive value. Terms may repeat.

a. If 100 patients with a disease are tested but only 80 test positive for the disease, that

means the test has a __sensitivity of 80%.

b. If 100 patients without a disease are tested and 90 test negative for the disease, that
means the test has a__ specificity of 90%.

c. If 100 patients test positive on a screening test but only 20 truly have the disease,
that means that the __ PPV is 20%.

d. If 100 patients test negative on a screening test but only 97% are truly disease-free,
that means the __NPV. is 97%.

e. The ability of a test to correctly identify all screened individuals who are positive for a
disease is the test’s sensitivity .

f. The ability of a test to correctly exclude all screened individuals without a disease is
the test’s specificity

5. For the following contingency table, calculate the sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV.
Interpret the numbers with the wording of the previous fill-in-the blanks and matching.

Sensitivity = 790 / 1000 = 0.79

Colonoscopy
79% of those identified with colon cancer via + -
colonoscopy also had a positive FIT blood test. FIT blood + 790 5.940 | 6,730
Specificity =93,060 / 99,000 = 0.94 test . 93,060 | 93,270

94% of those without colon cancer (via OOO SON0N TOWN
colonoscopy) were correctly identified as cancer-free by the FIT blood test.

PPV = 790 / 6.730 = 0.117

For those with a positive FIT blood test, there is a 11.7% probability they actually have cancer.

NPV = 93,060 / 93.270 = 0.998

For those with a negative FIT blood test, there is a 99.8% probability they are cancer-free.

Research Concepts 35
© 2022 Veritense™

Prevalence and Incidence

Prevalence is the number of existing disease cases during a period of time. In contrast,
incidence is the number of new disease cases that develop over a period of time.

For example, when we measure prevalence of heart disease in 2012, we don't distinguish
between people who had heart disease in 2011 and those who were newly diagnosed with heart
disease in 2012.

Here are 2 example questions.

A research article describes the number of new and existing cases of type 2 diabetes in the US in 2010.
What does this number refer to?

a. Incidence
b. Prevalence
c. Specificity
d. Sensitivity

A community nutritionist wants to find out how many new cases of pediatric obesity there were in her
county in the last year. What is she trying to estimate?

a. Incidence
b. Prevalence
c. Specificity
d. Sensitivity

Why does distinguishing between prevalence and incidence matter?

Many of our statistics come from cross-sectional surveys, such as NHANES and the BRFSS.
These surveys are snapshots in time — they do not identify people without disease and then
follow them up over time to see how many people develop disease.

The number of cases we identify during a period of time is a function of the incidence of the
disease and the duration of the disease. Duration is a function of the severity and mortality of
the disease.

Prevalence = Incidence x Duration

Those who are living longer with a disease are more likely to show up in our survey results than
those who don't live as long with the disease. You can imagine that people with more severe
disease may be more likely to die, and then less likely to be captured in our survey.

When trying to measure acute versus chronic disease, we also run into a duration problem. It is
difficult to estimate the incidence of food borne illnesses because some less severe forms self-
resolve at home after a few days. If someone is still sick after a few days, they may go to the
emergency department and be captured in a state surveillance system. They are likely
experiencing a more severe form of food borne illness than

someone who felt better after a few days. aoUapIoU| :\W ‘eoUa|eAed °g

Research Concepts 36
© 2022 Veritense™

When the duration of disease is very short, duration ~0 and prevalence approximates incidence
in the formula. When there is effective treatment for a disease, but not a cure, prevalence will
continue to grow as people live longer with the disease.

Incidence

Imagine prevalence as a bathtub of water. The amount of water in the bathtub is a function of
the water coming into the tub from the faucet and the water draining out of the tub through the
drain. The water coming into the tub is incidence, or new cases. The water draining out of the
tub is death as persons who die are no longer in our pool of cases.

For a disease where there is a cure or recovery, you could think of that as evaporation of the
water out of the tub because those cases leave the prevalence pool as well.

The duration of the disease is a function of it being acute or chronic, as well as the severity or
mortality. Very severe diseases that quickly lead to death have a short duration. Acute diseases,
like a week of the flu, come in and out of the pool quickly, so quickly, that incidence and
prevalence is often equivalent with duration making little difference.

Let’s focus on incidence now. If you were only
interested in the number of new cases of a disease,
instead of measuring the total number of cases
(prevalence) that would be water in the bathtub,
you want to capture the water coming in from the
faucet.

You can see that when we measure prevalence, we
don't distinguish between the water droplets that
have been in the bathtub for a while compared to
the brand-new water droplets from the faucet.

In this diagram, the bucket capturing the water from
the faucet is incidence. We’re not including any of
the pre-existing cases in the bathtub. We're also
not accounting for death rates.

Research articles will often report incidence as a rate — that is, the number of new cases in the
at-risk population over a certain period of time. In a survey, we might calculate an “event rate”
when we know someone had a heart attack, for example, but don’t know if it was their first. We

Research Concepts 37
© 2022 Veritense™

can report the number of heart attacks in our county per year as an event rate. If we have a
prospective cohort study and identify everyone who has never had a heart attack and follow
them for 20 years, we could calculate a true incidence rate using the number of years each
person was under follow-up as our denominator, and the number who had a _ heart attack for the
1 time as the numerator.

Here’s another way to think about prevalence and incidence with a cross-sectional survey
conducted over one year. We want to describe the prevalence of diabetes in our community.
We start the survey on Jan 1, 2012 and end it on Dec 31, 2012. To measure diabetes, we ask
participants, “has a doctor ever told you that you have diabetes?” The dotted line shows each
person's course, and the x symbol indicates when the person was diagnosed with diabetes. The
open circle is when they are surveyed. We conduct the survey 3 times throughout the year.

* —— Survey Period — —>

i oo

2 weseee bane . Settee EEE. @ Doon eescess:

4 QGreedecccsssssenssenssensssense Gp snscessssenssessensssnsse|ecsesses:

Jan 1, 2012 Dec 31, 2012

Person 1 is not included in our survey because they passed away before the start of our survey.
Had they been surveyed, they would have been a case.

Person 2 was diagnosed with diabetes early on in the survey period and surveyed late in the
year. They are a diabetes case because they were diagnosed before we surveyed them.

Person 3 is diagnosed with diabetes after our survey period, so when we survey them, they do
not report diabetes and we classify them as a non-case.

Person 4 is diagnosed with diabetes before the start of the survey period, and is surveyed
midway through the year. They are classified as a case.

Person 5 has not been diagnosed with diabetes and is surveyed early on in the survey period.
They are classified as without diabetes.

Research Concepts 38
© 2022 Veritense™

PPV and Prevalence

In the previous section, | mentioned that specificity and sensitivity are characteristics of a test,
while PPV and NPV vary both by the test characteristics and the underlying prevalence of the
disease in the population, or how common the disease is.

In each example below, the same screening test is used, which means the sensitivity and
specificity doesn’t vary because those are inherent to the test. However, the disease prevalence
varies in each population at 0.1%, 7%, and 18%.

Calculate the PPV for each example.

Disease Status
Pop #1

Screening
Test

100 99,900 100,000

Disease Status

Pop #2

+ -
Screening 6,440 | 1,860

Test

7,000 93,000 100,000

Disease Status
Pop #3

+
Screening + | 16,960 18,200
Test —_—'|_ 4.440 | 80,360 | 81,800

18,000 82,000 100,000

Research Concepts 39
© 2022 Veritense™

The population prevalence of the disease and the positive predictive value is highest in
Population 3. PPV increases with increasing prevalence, even with the same exact screening
test. How do we interpret PPV? The likelihood of truly having the disease given a positive test
result. It makes sense that PPV would vary with prevalence — in a low prevalence population,
the likelihood of having the diseases (positive test or not) would be lower than in a high
prevalence population. When talking about cost effectiveness, you can see that a screening test
with the given sensitivity and specificity has a higher yield in a higher prevalence or high-risk
population. A real-world example is HIV screening in either a general clinic, an STI clinic, or an
IV-drug treatment clinic as each setting has an increased risk for HIV prevalence.

Answers:

e Population #1: PPV = 92 / 2,090 = 0.04
e Population #2: PPV = 6,440 / 8,300 = 0.76
e Population #3: PPV = 16,560 / 18,200 = 0.91

By the way, to calculate overall prevalence, you divide TP + FN /N, so for Population #1, that
would be 100 / 100,000 = 0.1%

Morbidity and Mortality Rates

The RD exam may ask you a question about mortality rates or about morbidity rates. You need
to know the difference between morbidity and mortality.

Morbidity refers to the state of being unhealthy, Mortality refers to death.
not in good health, or with disease.

It may be used to talk about death
It may be used as a general indicator of health in _ from all-causes or from a specific
a community. disease.

Here’s an example question.

A new research study reports a 12% mortality rate among infants in your state, but a 10% infant
mortality rate in your neighboring state, over the past year. This means that:

More infants died in your state than the other state

More infants died in the other state than in your state

12% of infants in your state have some sort of disease

More infants in your state have disease than in the

other state V JeMsuy

aQoo0®

Research Concepts 40
© 2022 Veritense™

Odds Ratios

You may get a question on the exam asking you to interpret an odds ratio. Odds ratios are a
measure of association between a dependent and independent variable, and can be calculated
from a simple contingency table or can be adjusted for other related variables.

Let’s walk through an example. The Healthy Eating Index is a measure of diet quality assessed
against the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and ranges from 0 to 100. The overall score is
made of 13 components, reflecting different types of foods and different recommendations. A
research study examined the association between the Healthy Eating Index score and
prevalence of diabetes. They dichotomized the HEI at 50.

The odds ratio reported was 1.5 and can be interpreted as:

e The odds of diabetes in those with HEI < 50 was 1.5 times the odds of diabetes in those with
HEI = 50.
e The odds ratio of diabetes for those with HEI < 50 versus HEI 2 50 was 1.5.

The key is identifying the two groups being compared (HEI < 50 and HEI 2 50) and the outcome
variable (diabetes).

When the odds ratio is less than 1, indicating a lower odds in the “exposed” group (HEI < 50 in
this example), the interpretation can be a little trickier (you'll see in the next few pages). We can
flip our comparison groups for this example.

If the calculated odds ratio was 0.67, the following interpretations would be correct:

e The odds of diabetes in those with HEI < 50 was 0.67 times the odds of diabetes in those
with HEI 2 50.
e The odds ratio of diabetes for those with HEI < 50 versus HEI 2 50 was 0.67.

The following interpretations of the odds ratio are common but not technically correct.

e The odds of diabetes in those with HEI < 50 was 1.5 times higher than the odds of diabetes
in those with HEI 2 50.

e The odds of diabetes in those with HEI < 50 was 1.5-fold higher than the odds of diabetes in
those with HEI 2 50.

Research Concepts 41
© 2022 Veritense™

Let’s do some math to show that those two interpretations are incorrect.

If the probability of diabetes in the HEI < 50 group is 10%, and the probability of diabetes in the
HEI 2 50 group was 14%, then the corresponding odds are 11% and 16.7%. Don’t worry about
knowing how to calculate odds from probabilities.

Odds(Diabetes | HEI <50) _0.16666667 _
Odds (Diabetes |HEI>50) 0.1111111

If the odds of diabetes were higher in the HEI! 2 50 group, the denominator would be larger than
the numerator, and the resulting odds ratio would be less than 1. This can be interpreted as
reduced odds in the “exposed” group, which is in the numerator.

If you say that the odds are 1.5 times higher, what you’re really saying is that the odds in the
HEI < 50 group is (0.11) + (0.11 * 1.5) = 0.11 * 0.167 = 0.278 but that’s not the odds ratio, so it
can't be true.

If you say the odds are 1.5-fold higher, it would be the same as saying “times higher” but
because “folds higher” typically isn’t used correctly, most people don’t know the exact meaning
so it can be misinterpreted.

When the odds ratio is less than 1, you may see different, incorrect interpretations.

e The odds of diabetes in the HEI 2 50 group was 0.67 times lower than the odds of diabetes
in the HEI < 50 group.

e The odds of diabetes in the HEI 2 50 group was 0.33 times lower than the odds of diabetes
in the HEI < 50 group.

Lastly, there is an interpretation of odds ratios that is technically correct but easy to misinterpret.
They are usually expressed as a percent. You may have seen stories on the news talk about a
390% increase in economic growth. These stories are an example of manipulating numbers to
tell the story that you want.

Talking about percent increase or decrease in odds ratios is similarly misleading because actual
magnitude of the resulting difference depends on the baseline risk. For example, let’s say a
certain lifestyle behavior carries a 10% increased risk of disease. If a patient’s baseline risk for
an event is 0.001%, that 10% increased risk means much less compared to a patient with a
baseline risk of 7%, because 10% of 0.001% is much smaller than 10% of 7%.

For an odds ratio of 1.5, you could interpret it as 50% higher odds. For an odds ratio of 0.67,
you could interpret it as 33% lower odds. But by transforming the odds ratio into percentages,
you take the interpretation one more step away from the calculated numbers.

Research Concepts 42
© 2022 Veritense™

Odds Ratio Practice

When interpreting odds ratios, there’s no need to re-invent the wheel. Use the correct
interpretations on the previous pages for a “template” — don’t jazz it up or change the words, or
it'll likely be incorrect.

OR 0.67 with 2 groups: HEI 2 50 and comparison group HEI < 50; outcome: diabetes.

o The odds of diabetes in those with HEI = 50 was 0.67 times the odds of diabetes in
those with HEI < 50.
o The odds ratio of diabetes for those with HEI 2 50 versus HEI < 50 was 0.67.

1. OR 1.12 with 2 groups diabetes versus no diabetes; outcome: heart attack.
2. OR 1.5 with 2 groups: pregnant versus not pregnant women; outcome: normal
folic acid level

Answers:

1. OR 1.12 with 2 groups diabetes versus no diabetes; outcome: heart attack.
o The odds of heart attack in those with diabetes was 1.12 times the odds of heart
attack among those without diabetes.
o The odds ratio of heart attack for those with diabetes versus those without diabetes
was 1.12.
2. OR 1.5 with 2 groups: pregnant versus not pregnant women; outcome: normal
folic acid level
o The odds of normal folic acid levels in pregnant women was 1.5 times the odds of
normal folic acid levels in not-pregnant women.
o The odds ratio of a normal folic acid level for pregnant women versus not-pregnant
women was 1.5.

Mean, Median, Mode

Mean, median, and mode are all measures of central
tendency in a group of numbers or a data set — that is,
what is the most common value?

Which value you choose to report depends on many
things, such as the size of your sample and the
distribution.

The mean is the average across the population, such as

average age. The median is the 50" percentile, which may

or may not be the mean, depending on the distribution.

You may have heard of percentiles with infant and Mean

Median
children’s growth charts. Mode

The mode is the most frequent value.

Research Concepts 43
© 2022 Veritense™

The image on the previous page is a normal distribution of a continuous variable, such as age.
In anormal distribution, or bell curve, the mean, median, and mode are the same.

Positive skew

Median Median
' |
Mean Mean

When a distribution is skewed (like the distributions above), the mean, median, and mode no
longer lie atop one another. Instead, they spread out. With negative skew, the mean is lower
than the median. With positive skew, the mean is higher than the median. With either type of
skew, we would report the median rather than the mean.

Total cholesterol is typically positively skewed (pulled away from zero, towards high values). We
would want to report the median total cholesterol, rather than the mean, which is exaggerated
because of a few people with very high numbers. You might see the same pattern with BMI.

Test Your Knowledge
In a negatively skewed distribution, the median will be the mean.

a. greater than
b. less than

In a positively skewed distribution, the median will be the mean.

a. greater than
b. less than

When a distribution is not normally distributed, we would report the

a. median
b. mean
c. mode

Vv ‘dg ‘Vv :suemsuy

Research Concepts 44
© 2022 Veritense™

Standard deviation
Standard deviation is a way to describe the spread of a distribution.

We use standard deviations all the time — such as Z-scores to examine the risk of osteoporosis.
From a study on bone density in the population, an average was determined and all the other
values were standardized to that value so that they fall within 1, 2, 3, or more standard
deviations. Hence, a Z-score of 1 SD or 2 SD below the norm would signal low bone density, or
bone density below average.

Sometimes you'll see Z-scores and sometimes you'll see T-scores. They’re similar but different
in nuances you don’t need to know for the exam. If you’re interested in learning more, check out
online statistical courses.

459 529 599 669 809 949 1019 1089 25 2 “1.5 1 0 +1 415 42
Bone Mineral Density Bone Mineral Density Z-Scores
White Women, age 65 White Women, age 65
Actual BMD values Standard Distribution

Here’s a simplified example. For white women age 65, the average bone mineral density is 809
with SD 140. To create a Z-score distribution, we would set the mean value, 809, to zero. A
white woman age 65 with BMD 459 would have a Z-score of -2.5, while someone with a BMD of
949 would have a Z-score of +1.

(Individual BMD — mean BMD)

Zr-— =
score SD

Using the formula above, calculate out how | got the Z-scores of -2.5 and +1.

Research Concepts 45
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions

Answer these practice questions using the Study Smarter Method by Veritense™ that you read about in
Chapter 2 and 3 of the Study Smarter Method for the RD-Exam section. Instead of answering these
questions using your memory and logic, use the study guide text and/or your own research to determine
which answer is correct (and why), and why the other answers are incorrect. Pay attention to the question
itself, and be sure you know what the question is asking. There are answers with explanations following.
If this is your first set of practice questions, go back and skim Chapters 2 and 3 in the Study Smarter
Method for the RD-Exam section to remind yourself of the types of questions and how to answer them.

1.

Researchers want to design a study that identifies patients experiencing GERD and
follow them for 10 years and record who develops Barrett’s esophagus. What type of
study is this?

a. Case-control

b. Prospective

c. Retrospective

d. Randomized trial

Which of the following is a disadvantage of case-control studies?
a. Controls can be difficult to find
b. Efficient for studying rare conditions
c. Data may be subject to recall bias
d. AandC

You would like to conduct a study that examines the association of childhood sugar-
sweetened beverage consumption on risk of cancer in adulthood. Which would be the
best study design?

a. Randomized trial

b. Prospective cohort study

c. Case control study

d. Cross-sectional survey

Estimate the correlation coefficient (r) for the data in the following e
graph. 7
a. 0.9
b. 0.2
c. 0
d. -0.2

Research Concepts 46
© 2022 Veritense™

5. Which of the following is an example of snowball sampling?

a.

b.

d.

After identifying an individual with newly-diagnosed HIV, you ask them to share
information about your study with members of their support group

You ask every 3” person who walks into the shopping mall food court to fill out
your survey

You use a random number generator to select patients from a cardiovascular
disease registry list

A and B

6. Which of the following is NOT considered when assigning evidence grades in the
Evidence Analysis Library?

a.

b.
c.
d

Scientific rigor and validity

Clinical impact of studied outcomes
Consistency of findings across studies
Number of authors contributing to the research

7. The results of a 3-day food record were obtained in June and again a month later. What
is this called?

Validity

Sensitivity

Reliability

Specificity

a.

b.
c.
d

8. You want to make sure the tool you are using to collect data about dietary supplements
in your community has validity. To ensure the tool is valid, you need to select a tool that:
has been used repeatedly in the literature

a.
b
c.
d. yields primarily quantitative data

. contains words and phrases familiar to participants

measures accurately what it is intended to measure

Research Concepts 47
© 2022 Veritense™

Practice Questions (Answers)

1. Researchers want to design a study that identifies patients experiencing GERD and
follow them for 10 years and record who develops Barrett's esophagus. What type of
study is this?

a. Case-control

b. Prospective

c. Retrospective

d. Randomized trial

Answer: B. This is a prospective observational study: prospective because they are measuring
the exposure (GERD) at case identification and following participants forward to the outcome,
Barrett’s esophagus; observational because there is no treatment or controlled exposure.

2. Which of the following is a disadvantage of case-control studies?
a. Controls can be difficult to find
b. Efficient for studying rare conditions
c. Data may be subject to recall bias
d. AandC

Answer: D. In case-control studies, you identify cases by measuring the outcome and then
move backwards to measure the exposure. You often match to controls that are similar to the
cases in everything but the outcome. Advantages of this study design include the ability to look
at multiple exposures, efficient for rare outcomes since you identify cases based on the
outcome, and they can be nested within existing cohort studies. However, information that relies
on memory may be subject to recall bias, and it can be difficult for some conditions to find a
suitable control group.

3. You would like to conduct a study that examines the association of childhood sugar-
sweetened beverage consumption on risk of cancer in adulthood. Which would be the
best study design?

a. Randomized trial

b. Prospective cohort study
c. Case control study

d. Cross-sectional survey

Answer: B. A prospective cohort study would be the best option, because this study design
works well for outcomes that take a long time to develop. By enrolling children at the time of the
exposure, you would gain a more accurate measure of their sugar-sweetened beverage intake
than if you conducted a case-control study or cross-sectional survey in adulthood and asked
them to recall their consumption. A randomized trial would not be feasible resource-wise for a
study this long, and may not be ethical if we believe sugar-sweetened beverages are harmful.

Research Concepts 48
© 2022 Veritense™

4. Estimate the correlation coefficient (r) for the data in the following
graph. Y
a. 0.9
b. 0.2
c. 0
d. -0.2

Answer: C. Correlation can only measure linear relationships, so data points that form a non-
linear relationship would return a correlation coefficient of 0, even though there seems to be a
strong pattern here. Remember that for linear relationships, a positive correlation is seen if X
and Y increases together or decrease together, while a negative correlation is seen when X and
Y have an inverse relationship.

5. Which of the following is an example of snowball sampling?

a. After identifying an individual with newly-diagnosed HIV, you ask them to share
information about your study with members of their support group

b. You ask every 3 person who walks into the shopping mall food court to fill out your
survey

c. You use a random number generator to select patients from a cardiovascular
disease registry list

d. AandB

Answer: A. Snowball sampling is done when you ask participants to share information of
people they think would be open to participating in your study, or if that is not appropriate, you
ask participants to share information about your study with their acquaintances. This may result
in a study population that is more homogenous than using other methods, so this method is
typically only used when you are studying something environmental, cultural, or network based.
Answer choice B is an example of convenience sampling, while answer choice C is an example
of random sampling.

6. Which of the following is NOT considered when assigning evidence grades in the
Evidence Analysis Library?
a. Scientific rigor and validity
b. Clinical impact of studied outcomes
c. Consistency of findings across studies
d. Number of authors contributing to the research

Answer: D. Evidence grades, ranging from Grade | (strong) to Grade IV (consensus) or Grade
IV (insufficient evidence) are assigned based on quality of the study (including scientific rigor
and validity, design and execution), the number of studies and subjects, consistency of findings
across studies and the magnitude of the effect across studies, the importance of the studied
outcomes (clinical impact), and the generalizability of the findings to the population of interest.

Research Concepts 49
© 2022 Veritense™

7. The results of a 3-day food record were obtained in June and again a month later. What
is this called?
a. Validity
b. Sensitivity
c. Reliability
d. Specificity

Answer: C. This isn’t a great question, but is reflective of what you might see on the exam. Why
isn’t it a great question? Because it’s plausible that someone would change how they eat within
a month, and the question doesn’t specify that the 3-day food record is being done with the
same person. But the idea of repeating the same procedure in the same way, with the same
person, is getting at reliability. Don’t just be able to recognize that it’s referring to reliability, be
able to write out the definitions of the other answers, too.

8. You want to make sure the tool you are using to collect data about dietary supplements
in your community has validity. To ensure the tool is valid, you need to select a tool that:
a. has been used repeatedly in the literature
b. contains words and phrases familiar to participants
c. measures accurately what it is intended to measure
d. yields primarily quantitative data

Answer: C. Many researchers use instruments that have been used previously in literature
because repeated use is often confused with validity. It’s important to note that an instrument
that has been validated in a certain population is not necessarily valid in another population.
You would want to make sure you use an instrument validated in a population like yours, not
one developed for another culture or another country. Answer choice B speaks to face validity,
which is only one aspect of validity. Quantitative data does not have anything to do with validity,
they are 2 separate concepts. Answer choice C is the verbatim definition of validity.

L = Ovi / (608 — 676) ‘S°2- = Ov / (608 — 6Sr)

Research Concepts 50
