

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
1. Using the 5-week, simple moving average method of forecasting and the data below, the dietitian 
will need how many servings for October 17th?  
   
 Roast Beef Special  Number of Servings Consumed  
September 5  125  
September 12  115  
September 19  119  
September 26  123  
October 2  120  
  October 10  121  
A. 115  
B. 120  
C. 121 
D. 125  
  
 
2. A dietitian who is counseling the mother of a child with eating difficulties has evaluated needs 
and decided on the best alternatives for feeding. The dietitian should next:  
A. evaluate the mother's level of comprehension. 
B. instruct the mother in various feeding approaches.  
C. obtain a list of the child's food preferences and typical eating patterns.  
D. review with the mother the ways to implement the recommended approaches.  
 
 
  
  
3. During a counseling session about lowering sodium, the client states, "I have begun reading 
labels to identify the sodium content of foods." The client is in which of the following stages of 
change?  
A. Precontemplation 
B. Contemplation  
 
   
C. Preparation 
D. Action  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
4. A distribution of body weights is shown on the curve below.  
  
  
Which of the following statements best describes the samples that fall within the shaded areas?  
A. They are positively skewed. 
B.  They are negatively skewed. 
C.  They indicate a bimodal distribution.  
D.  They are two standard deviations from the mean.  
 
 
 
5. A patient has a pre-surgery serum albumin level of 3.7 mg/dl and a post-surgery level of 3.1 
mg/dl. The dietitian should recognize that:  
A. a laboratory error has likely occurred.  
 
 
B. the patient is experiencing a protein-losing enteropathy. 
C. this is an expected response to surgical stress  
D. the patient is experiencing severe visceral protein storage depletion.  
 
 
  
6. An adolescent's BMI is plotted at the 90th percentile on the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention growth chart. The adolescent is:  
A. obese.  
 
 
B. overweight. 
C.  normal weight. 
D.  at risk for overweight.  
 
 
  
7. Which nutrition intervention is most appropriate to recommend to a patient with chronic kidney 
disease on hemodialysis with the following labs: albumin: 2.8 g/dL, calcium: 8.4 mg/dL, 
potassium: 5.5 mEq/L, phosphorus : 4.8 mg/dL, and BUN : 50 mg/dL ?  
A. Check vitamin D level 
B.  Decrease fluid intake 
C.  Increase protein intake 
D.  Add calcium supplement  
 
 
  
 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
8. An infant with phenylketonuria requires which of the following dietary alterations as part of the 
nutritional treatment plan?  
A. Low-isoleucine, high-valine 
B. High-isoleucine, low-valine 
C. Low-phenylalanine, high-tyrosine 
D. High-phenylalanine, low-tyrosine  
 
 
  
 
9. How many FTE employees would be required to staff ten 8-hour positions that require coverage 7 
days a week?  
A. 10.0 
B. 14.0 
C.  8.75 
D.  15  
 
 
  
 
10.  Transferring a staff member who is rumored to have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
violates which of the following acts?  
A. Equal Employment Opportunity Act 
B. Americans with Disabilities Act 
C. Fair Labor Standards Act 
D. Civil Rights Act  
 
 
11. How An infant exclusively breastfed during the first 6 months of life should receive daily 
supplementation of which of the following vitamins? 
A. K 
B. D 
C. B12 
D. A 
 
12. Which type of cells in the pancreas secrete insulin? 
A. Acinar 
B. Duct 
C. Exocrine 
D. Endocrine 
 
13. A dietitian wants to lead a series of classes at a local community center aimed at helping people 
learn how to prepare meals for the week. Which of the following modes of education would be 
most appropriate to help develop these skills? 
A. Discussing different dishes to cook. 
B. Reading about cooking in a book. 
C. Talking to the group about how they cook certain dishes. 
D. Demonstrating cooking and preparing foods in the classroom. 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
14. A dietitian is leading a study to assess the effectiveness of adding a specific antioxidant 
supplement on reducing cardiovascular disease in Indigenous adults. Which of the following 
study designs would be most appropriate to measure the effectiveness of the supplement? 
A. Observational 
B. Cross sectional 
C. Epidemiological 
D. Randomized controlled 
 
15. What are the nutrition support guideline recommendations for calories and protein for critically 
ill patients without renal or hepatic dysfunction with BMI >50 kg/m2? 
A. 25-30 kcal/kg actual weight and 1.2-1.5 g/kg ideal body weight 
B. 22-25 kcal/kg ideal body Weight and 2-2.5 g/kg ideal body weight 
C. 11-14 kcal/kg actual body weight and 1.5-2 g/kg ideal body weight 
D. 15-20 kcal/kg ideal body weight and 1.0-1.5 g/kg ideal body weight  
 
16. What micronutrient deficiency may be present in a 5-year-old child who eats high amounts of 
milk, cheese, and yogurt each day, and has refused to try any other foods for the past 2 years? 
A. Folate 
B. Calcium 
C. Riboflavin 
D. Potassium 
 
17. A patient with stomach cancer and recent subtotal gastrectomy may commonly experience 
which of the following complications? 
A. Esophageal dysphagia 
B. Aspiration pneumonia 
C. Metabolic syndrome 
D. Dumping syndrome 
 
18. Which of the following factors results in the greatest risk of dehydration for a patient diagnosed 
with a stroke? 
A. Enteral nutrition dependence 
B. Thickened liquid prescription 
C. Decreased taste sensation 
D. Dominant hand weakness 
 
19. After eating dinner at a new restaurant, a patient experiences nausea, abdominal pain and 
respiratory distress. Which part of the meal is the most likely cause of this reaction? 
A. Roll and butter 
B. Grilled chicken breast 
C. Steamed broccoli and cauliflower florets 
D. Green salad with olive oil and vinegar dressing 
 
 
 
 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
20. Which of the following treatments would be appropriate for a patient experiencing 
hypoglycemia? 
A. 12 oz. Diet cola 
B. Peanut butter cup 
C. 4 oz. orange juice 
D. 4 crackers with cheese 
 
21. In which of the following patient populations is the initiation of parenteral nutrition support an 
appropriate recommendation? 
A. Malnourished patient with hemiglossectomy 
B. Critically ill underweight patient with pancreatitis  
C. Actual ill overweight patient with vomiting for 2 days 
D. Patient at risk for malnutrition with small bowel obstruction 
 
22. Which of the following parameters should be evaluated and monitored in an enterally fed 
patient experiencing frequent constipation? 
A. Diameter of feeding tube 
B. Head of bed elevation 
C. Weight trends 
D. Fluid intake 
 
23. What is the primary method for assessing a patient’s renal function? 
A. eGFR 
B. Blood pressure 
C. Total cholesterol 
D. Potassium intake 
 
24. When deciding whether dietitians will work on the weekend, the Clinical Nutrition Manager 
(CNM) continuously sought unanimous agreement from her staff before deciding. Which 
leadership style did the CNM exhibit? 
A. Autocratic 
B. Consensus 
C. Participative 
D. Laissez-faire 
 
25. During an interview for a foodservice worker position, a panelist asks the candidate, "How many 
children do you have?” As the lead dietitian conducting the interview, what is the most 
appropriate way to handle this situation? 
A. Allow the candidate to answer and assess their response 
B. Interrupt and inform the candidate they don’t need to answer the question. 
C. Allow the candidate to answer but clarify that the information won’t influence the 
selection process. 
D. Follow up with a question about how the candidate will manage childcare with the job’s 
demands.  
 
 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
26. Which of the following expenditures should be included in a capital budget? 
A. Food 
B. Payroll taxes 
C. Office supplies 
D. Kitchen equipment 
 
27. Which of the following guidelines must be met for a meal to be reimbursable under the Child 
and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP)? 
A. All dairy products must be low-fat or fat-free 
B. At least 50% of the meal calories must be from protein-rich sources. 
C. At least one serving of a whole grain-rich product must be served each day.  
D. At least ½ cup of fresh fruits or vegetables must be served at every meal. 
 
28. A month after introducing a new selective menu, the amount of plate waste from patients has 
doubled. What should be the dietitian’s first course of action? 
A. Revert to the previous menu. 
B. Conduct a survey to gather patient-preference data. 
C. Review and verify the standardized recipes used in the new menu.  
D. Interview staff to gather feedback on patient reactions to the new menu. 
 
29. This foodservice organization calculates inventory value based on both the unit purchase price 
and the number of units in each purchase. What method of valuation is this? 
A. Actual purchase price 
B. Weighted average (WA) 
C. First In, First Out (FIFO) 
D. Last In, First Out (LIFO) 
 
30. The ticket price of a refrigerator is $10,000, has a life expectancy of 10 years, salvage value of 
$1,250, and has a 15% return on investment. How much does the refrigerator depreciate 
annually using the straight-line method? 
A. $875 
B. $1,000 
C. $1,125 
D. $1,300 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 (Continue to page 7 for answers and rationales)  

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
Practice Questions for Dietitians Answer Key and Classification List 
Item Number Domain Classification       Answer Key 
1 IV. BB 
2 I.C C 
3 I.C C 
4 I.DD 
5 II.AC 
6 II.AB 
7 II.C C 
8 II.C C 
9 III.AB 
10 III.BB 
11 I.AB 
12 I.AD 
13 I.BD 
14 I.C D 
15 II.AB 
16 II.AA 
17 II.BD 
18 II.BB 
19 II.BA 
20 II.C C 
21 II.C D 
22 II.DD 
23 II.DA 
24 III.AB 
25 III.BB 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
   26   III.C    D 
   27   III.E    C 
   28   IV.A    B 
   29   IV.B    B 
   30   IV.C    A    
  
 
Rationales and References  
1.   
RATIONALE:  
A: Number consumed on second week  
B: (KEY): 5-weel moving average: 115+119+123+120+121= .598/5 = 119.6 = 120 
C: Averaged all six days: 125+115+119+123+120+121 = 723. 723/6=120.5=121  
D: Number consumed on first week  
  
REFERENCE:  
Gregoire MB. Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach. 9 th ed. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 2017, 153.  
  
2.  
RATIONALE:  
Changing behavior is the goal of nutrition education. Option C demonstrates that the client has 
knowledge of the diet, and they can apply the knowledge to select the appropriate dinner menu. 
Option A is not correct because although the client is able to demonstrate knowledge of foods that 
must be avoided, there is no evidence to show that the client will apply the knowledge and avoid the 
5 foods named. Option B is not correct because although the client verbalizes elements of what is 
known about the diet, there is no evidence to show that they are able to apply the knowledge. 
Option D is not correct, because although the client is able to identify foods they have had to eat and 
drink on the diet, there is no evidence to show that all the foods they had to eat, or drink followed 
the recommended diet.  
  
REFERENCE:  
Nutrition Education, 4th edition, Contento, 376-379.  
  
3.  
RATIONALE:  
A. Precontemplation: client has no intention of changing behaviors in next 6 months, resists       
efforts to modify behavior.  
B. Contemplation: recognize need for change, but give reasons for not starting to change  

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
C. Preparation client identifies motivators, believes advantages outweigh disadvantages of change. 
Correct answer. 
D. Action: client has altered the behavior  
  
REFERENCE:   
Nutrition Counseling & Education, 4th edition by Bauer & Liou,19-20.  
  
4.   
RATIONALE:  
A normal distribution is depicted. The X-bar symbol is used in statistics to represent the arithmetic 
mean. A normal distribution is unimodal (one peak), and the mean, median (50th percentile), and 
mode (value of highest frequency) of a normal distribution are equal, meaning the distribution has 
zero skew. Thus, A and B are incorrect because this distribution has neither a positive nor negative 
skew, and C is incorrect because this distribution is not bimodal.  
  
In normal distribution, 95% of values fall within two standard deviations of the mean. Thus, the 
shaded areas represent the 5% of values that are greater than or equal to two standard deviations 
from the mean. 
  
REFERENCE:   
Van Horn L, Beto J. Research: Successful Approaches in Nutrition and Dietetics. 4th ed. Chicago, IL. 
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 2019, 301.  
  
5.  
RATIONALE:  
Albumin is a negative acute phase protein that decreases in response to inflammation, including in 
response to stress and trauma of surgery.   
  
REFERENCE:   
Krause's Food & the Nutrition Care Process (2023) Mahan LK, Raymond JL/W B Saunders Company, 
1012.  
  
  
6.  
RATIONALE:  
Overweight BMI is >85th percentile <95th percentile, obese BMI is at or above 95th percentile. 90th 
percentile on the CDC growth chart - overweight category.  
  
REFERENCE:    
Krause's Food & the Nutrition Care Process (2023) Mahan LK, Raymond JL/W B Saunders Company, 
357.  
  
  
 
 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
7.   
RATIONALE:  
A. Checking vitamin D is not required with the lab values available  
B. CKD/HD patient, fluid intake with the labs as listed above does not need an adjustment 
C. (KEY) HD patient requires increased protein intake  
D. Calcium is within normal limits, supplement not needed   
REFERENCE: Krause's Food & the Nutrition Care Process (2023) Mahan LK, Raymond JL/W B Saunders 
Company, 767-771.  
  
8.   
RATIONALE:  
Phenylketonuria nutritional management involves restricting the substrate -phenylalanine and 
supplementing the product-tyrosine due to a deficiency or inactivity of phenylalanine hydroxylase.  
  
REFERENCE:  Krause's Food & the Nutrition Care Process (2023) Mahan LK, Raymond JL/W B 
Saunders Company, 1003-1004.  
  
9.   
RATIONALE:  
A: 10 staff * 40 hrs/week = 400 hours / 10 = 10.0 FTE  
B:(KEY): 10*8*7=560 hours; 560/40 = 14.0 FTE 
C: 40/8 = 5 * 7 * 10 = 350 hours; 350 / 40 = 8.75 FTE  
D: 8-hour positions + 7 days = 15.0 FTE  
  
REFERENCE:  
Gregoire MB. Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach. 9 th ed. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 2017, 385.  
  
10.   
RATIONALE:  
A: OSHA specifies workplace safety rules.  
B (KEY): ADA provides civil rights protection for people with physical or mental impairment that 
substantially limits one or more major life activities (e.g, working).  
C: FLSA requires payment of minimum wage and overtime pay, restricts employment of children, and 
requires record keeping.  
D: The Civil Rights Act provides remedies for intentional discrimination and harassment on the basis 
of race, color, religion, sex or national origin.  
  
REFERENCE:  
Gregoire MB. Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach. 9 th ed. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 2017, 361-363.  
  
 
 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
11.  
RATIONALE: 
Human breastmilk does not contain enough Vitamin D for infants. Infants that are exclusively receiving 
human breastmilk should be supplemented with 400 IU of vitamin D every day starting in the first month 
after birth. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Judith Brown, Nutrition Through The Life Cycle, 7
th
 edition, pg 169 
 
12.  
RATIONALE: 
Exocrine cells secrete digestive enzymes and alkaline solution to neutralize stomach acid in the 
duodenum. Acinar and duct cells are both exocrine cells. Endocrine cells secrete insulin.   
 
REFERENCE: 
Gropper S, Smith J, Carr T, Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism, 8
th
 ed, 45 
 
13.  
RATIONALE:  
Cooking is a hands-on activity and skill that would best be learned by demonstration and practicing. 
Practicing skills like how to hold a knife, and how to cook different dishes would be most valuable. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Contento, Isabel, Nutrition Education, 4
th
 edition, pg 454 
 
14. 
RATIONALE:  
A randomized controlled study/trial would be most appropriate. To test the effectiveness of a 
supplement, you need to have a group that is receiving the supplement, compared to a group with 
similar demographics that are receiving a placebo. The participants of this study will be placed randomly 
into different groups to reduce bias. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Van Horn, Beto, Research: Successful Approaches in Nutrition and Dietetics, 4
th
 edition, pg 131 
 
15. 
RATIONALE: 
Option B-ASPEN/SCCM Clinical guidelines recommend 22-25 kcal/kg ideal body weight and 2-2.5 g/kg 
protein ideal body weight for patients with BMI > 50, other options may over or underestimate needs 
 
REFERENCE: 
Charney P, Malone A. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Pocket Guide to Nutrition Assessment, 229 
 
 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
16. 
RATIONALE: 
Picky eating is a common problem in children that can put them at risk for nutrient deficiencies. Milk, 
cheese, and yogurt are good sources of calcium, riboflavin, and potassium. These foods alone are not an 
adequate source of folate. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Whitney E, Rolfes S, Understanding Nutrition, 297-378 
 
17. 
RATIONALE:  
A and B are not complications associated with gastric surgery-they are upper GI tract related issues; 
metabolic syndrome is not a gastric surgery complication. The most common complication of gastric 
surgery –partial, subtotal or total gastrectomy is dumping syndrome due to rapid transit of foods or 
liquids. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Mahan LK, Raymond JL, Krause’s Food and Nutrition Care Process, 801 
 
18. 
RATIONALE:  
Patients diagnosed with stroke often have multiple symptoms that impede nutrition intake. While some 
stroke patients are dependent on enteral nutrition, sufficient water can be given via the tube to avoid 
dehydration. Weakness of dominant hand can cause issues with coordination, but there are many aids 
available like straws or assistance at meals to help patients with fluid intake. Decreased taste sensation is 
more likely to cause decreased food intake rather than decreased fluid intake. Thickened liquid diets are 
unappealing because of the texture of the liquid and so these diet prescriptions often cause significant 
decrease in fluid intake putting patients at high risk for dehydration.  
 
REFERENCE: 
Dorner B, Diet and Nutrition Care Manual, 2-5 
 
19. 
RATIONALE: 
 The symptoms described are classic symptoms of food induced anaphylaxis so A, the roll and butter, is 
the most likely source due to the inclusion of two of the most common allergens: wheat and cow’s milk. 
None of the other items are common allergens. 
 
REFERENCE: 
741, Mahan LK, Raymond JL, Krause’s Food and Nutrition Care Process, 519 
 
 
 
 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
 
20. 
RATIONALE:  
Hypoglycemia should be treated with 15 grams of carbohydrate (C). Protein and fat delay the digestion 
and absorption of carbohydrates making B & D incorrect. Diet or calorie-free beverages do not contain 
carbohydrates, making A incorrect.  
 
REFERENCE: 
Krause, p. 654 
 
21. 
RATIONALE:  
A -can be fed enterally, B- enteral nutrition support trial is recommended first, C-may stay NPO for a few 
days and then advanced to an oral diet, D-dysfunctional gastrointestinal tract-parenteral nutrition 
support is recommended. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Mahan LKM Raymond JL, Krause’s Food and Nutrition Care Process, 877 
Malone A, Carney LN, Carrera AL, Mays A. ASPEN Enteral Nutrition Handbook, 67 
 
22. 
RATIONALE:  
A, B and C do not affect GI function, D-daily provision of adequate fluid is important to avoid 
constipation. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Mahan LKM Raymond JL, Krause’s Food and Nutrition Care Process, 220 
 
23. 
RATIONALE:  
B & C are not measures of renal function. Potassium intake does not indicate renal function. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Mahan LK, Raymond JL, Krause’s Food and Nutrition Care Process, 761 
 
24. 
RATIONALE:  
An autocratic leader makes decisions unilaterally without input from others. A participative leader 
involves the members in the process but does not require unanimous agreement. Laissez-fair leaders 
take a hands-off approach and allow the team to make the decision. A consensus leader focuses on 
achieving unanimous agreement among the group. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Management Practice in Dietetics (2022 – Revised 5
th
) Hudson / pp. 73-80 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
 
25. 
RATIONALE:  
A is incorrect because asking about family or children is illegal, as it introduces potential for 
discrimination based on family status. C is incorrect because allowing the candidate to answer the 
question, even if you try to reassure them, still exposes the interviewer to legal risks by gathering 
irrelevant and protected information. D is incorrect because it continues to focus on personal life issues, 
which are inappropriate in a pre-employment interview context. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Management Practice in Dietetics (2022 – Revised 5th) Hudson, 270-273 
 
26. 
RATIONALE:  
Capital budgets include equipment, building(s), and land expenses. Operational budgets include expenses 
related to day-to-day operations such as food, payroll taxes for employees, hourly wages, etc. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Gregoire, Foodservice Organizations 9
th
 edition, p 414 
 
27. 
RATIONALE: 
 A is incorrect because while low-fat or fat-free dairy is encouraged for certain age groups (children over 2 
years), the CACFP does not require all dairy products to be low-fat or fat-free across all age groups. 
Whole milk is allowed for children between 1 and 2 years of age. 
B is incorrect because the CACFP does not have a guideline specifying that a certain percentage of 
calories must come from protein.  
D is incorrect because while fruits and vegetables are important components of CACFP meal patterns, 
they do not have to be fresh, as the program allows a variety of forms, including frozen, canned, or dried. 
Additionally, CACFP meal patterns do not require that fruits or vegetables be served at every meal. 
However, fruits or vegetables are required at certain meals and snacks throughout the day based on the 
meal pattern requirements. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Child and Adult Care Food Program. United States Department of Agriculture. 
http://www.fns.usda.gov/cacfp/child-and-adult-care-food-program                
 
28. 
RATIONALE:  
While verifying standardized recipes is important, it does not directly address the issues of increased 
plate waste. Reverting to the old menu might solve the waste issue temporarily, but it doesn’t provide 
insights into why the new menu failed. Staff feedback might offer some insights, but it is second-hand 
information and will not capture patient preferences. Collecting patient-preference data will provide 

Registration Examination for Dietitians – Practice Questions  
  
valuable insights into why the new menu isn’t well received. This information is critical for making 
informed decisions.  
 
REFERENCE: 
Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach (2017 – 9
th
) Gregoire, pp. 48-49 & 454. 
 
29. 
RATIONALE: 
 There are several methods to value foodservice inventory. Typically, organizations use the actual 
purchase price for each item, LIFO (the purchase price of the oldest item would be used), FIFO (the 
purchase price of the newest item is used), or a weighted average (prices determined the unit prices and 
number of units). 
 
REFERENCE: 
Gregoire, Foodservice Organizations 9
th
 edition, p 141 
 
30. 
RATIONALE: 
a.  ($10,000 - $1,250) / 10 years = $875 [KEY] 
b. $10,000 / 10 = $1,000 [incorrect] 
c. ($10,000 + $1,250) / 10 = $1,125 [incorrect] 
d. ($10,000 - $1,250) x 0.15 = $1,312.5 [incorrect] 
REFERENCE: 
Foodservice Organizations: A Managerial and Systems Approach (2017 – 9
th
) Gregoire, pp. 403. 
 